[Senate Hearing 117-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


 
    ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

                              ----------                              

                                       U.S. Senate,
           Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
                                                    Washington, DC.

                       NONDEPARTMENTAL WITNESSES

    [Clerk&#x27;s note.--The subcommittee was unable to hold 
hearings on nondepartmental witnesses. The statements and 
letters of those submitting written testimony are as follows:]
             Prepared Statement of Aclara Technologies, LLC
    As a leading technology provider to electric, gas and water 
utilities, Aclara Technologies, LLC--a wholly-owned subsidiary of 
Hubbell Incorporated \1\--respectfully urges you to prioritize 
modernization of the nation&#x27;s electric distribution systems and funding 
to improve the performance, efficiency, and safety of our nation&#x27;s 
energy and water distribution infrastructure in the Fiscal Year (FY) 
2022 Energy and Water Appropriations bill. We thank you for this 
opportunity to express our support for this funding and appreciate your 
consideration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Hubbell Incorporated is an international manufacturer of high 
quality, reliable electrical and utility solutions for a broad range of 
customer and end market applications. With 2020 revenues of $4.2 
billion, Hubbell Incorporated operates 70 manufacturing facilities in 
the United States, employing over 9,550 Americans, and has additional 
facilities and employees around the world. The corporate headquarters 
is located in Shelton, CT. Hubbell Inc. acquired Aclara Technologies in 
2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Aclara Technologies, LLC (``Aclara&#x27;&#x27;) provides smart infrastructure 
technologies to electric, gas and water utilities, with offerings in 
advanced metering, utility automation, methane sensing, device 
networking and communications, data management, analytics, and customer 
service. Over 1,100 utilities in thirty-six countries rely on proven 
Aclara solutions. There are currently 1,000 Aclara clients located in 
all 50 states and Aclara employs over 1,500 staff in the United States 
and over 195 internationally. Companies like Aclara prove that smart 
technologies mean jobs, not just at Aclara, but also at utilities in 
the form of installation and monitoring jobs.
    Aclara offers its strong support for the advancement of 
technologies that can improve our nation&#x27;s energy and water 
distribution networks by providing enhanced monitoring, detection, and 
control capabilities. These technologies are an important and cost-
effective way to increase reliability, efficiency, and safety of our 
ageing infrastructure. Supporting the advancement of these technologies 
will be crucial as the country&#x27;s energy and water distribution networks 
continue to age and as the risks for utilities and network operators 
rise.
                 electrical distribution infrastructure
    The U.S. currently has over 500 million above-ground utility poles 
with over 5 million miles of overhead distribution conductors fed from 
greater than 62,000 distribution substations. Aclara understands that 
electric utilities must divide their collective attention between many 
priorities including maintaining the vast distribution infrastructure 
mentioned above and adapting the infrastructure to the deployment of 
distributed energy resources such as solar, wind, and storage. The 
technology to verify the health of the distribution assets such as the 
position and orientation of utility poles and the attached conductors 
is in development to enable utilities to sense, for example, a car has 
collided with a utility pole or an overhead conductor has dropped from 
the utility pole. Other key analytics about clusters of these 
conditions, as when windstorms or ice buildups cause cascade failures 
of conductor support systems, enable utilities to respond in real time 
to failure events as well as better estimate resources required for 
large scale recoveries. The technology in development is also very 
cost-effective, as it can be installed on new distribution system 
construction and easily retrofitted to existing distribution 
infrastructure. In addition to ensuring funds are dedicated to the 
advancement of distribution infrastructure, we also urge you to support 
appropriations for technologies to make our electrical distribution 
asset monitoring systems ``smarter,&#x27;&#x27; particularly when failure of 
these systems presents a safety risk to the public.
    Specifically, for FY22, we urge support for two important 
demonstration projects to be carried out within the DOE Office of 
Electricity&#x27;s Resilient Distribution Systems Grid Sensors and Sensor 
Analytics program. The first demonstration project should focus on 
utilizing data from advanced distribution sensors that are deployed on 
existing distribution lines to predict and/or detect vegetation contact 
in order to mitigate wildfires and wildfire impacts.The second 
demonstration project should focus on measuring the condition of 
utility poles in terms of their position, impacts, and presence of high 
temperatures. Data from the sensors should be utilized and visualized 
from these devices to provide useful and immediate analytics to improve 
the safety of the general public and improve electrical distribution 
network performance indices.
    Also of importance in discussions about electric grid 
infrastructure is the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. For 
decades, sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) has been used as a dielectric 
insulator in gas insulated systems. One pound of SF6 has the same 
global warming potential as 22,800 pounds of CO2. 
Additionally, since it is such a stable compound, it has a life of 
3,200 years in the atmosphere vs 200 years for CO2. The US 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has established a voluntary 
program in which partner companies agree to reduce SF6 emissions 
through technically and economically feasible actions. Although SF6 
designs have been commercially available and have functioned reliably 
for the past 30 years, new available technologies have emerged at 
comparable prices that offer superior performance and a greatly reduced 
carbon footprint. These alternatives should be strongly promoted in 
grid devices operating under 72kV. Unfortunately, there has not been a 
good alternative found for SF6 for grid equipment above 72kV. As such, 
we urge DOE to advance safe and effective capture and reuse 
technologies for SF6 in grid equipment above 72kV.
                          water infrastructure
    Although many of our nation&#x27;s water and wastewater systems have 
been around for more than a century, water infrastructure spending has 
received a significantly smaller and decreasing share of total 
infrastructure investment. the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) estimates a needed investment of $750 billion over the next 20 
years to maintain the nation&#x27;s drinking water and wastewater 
infrastructure. Without the necessary federal funding to close the gap, 
communities across the country will continue to face rate increases 
that disproportionately impact our most vulnerable communities.
    Water leaks cost many cities as much as 10 to 30 percent loss of 
their water, leaks that also waste a lot of energy. The EPA estimates 
that drinking water and wastewater systems account for 30 to 40 percent 
of total energy consumed by municipalities. As much as 8.4 billion 
kilowatts is wasted each year moving water nationwide. Due to ageing 
infrastructure, significant energy savings are possible through the use 
of leak detection and pressure monitoring technologies to improve 
operational efficiencies and reduce water loss.
    Water system efficiency and smart water networks should be a 
clearly stated goal of any investments made in our nation&#x27;s water 
infrastructure. Water distribution systems should be modernized in a 
way that increases water and energy efficiency and enables customers 
and utilities to interact with it as never before. This will require 
smart water networks that facilitate the collection of data via sensors 
along distribution networks, advanced analytics, and the incorporation 
of communications technologies to optimize performance, preempt 
problems, and allow for rapid response.
    The utilization of infrastructure solutions such as distribution 
network leak detection, pressure monitoring, and sanitary and combined 
sewer monitoring technologies during upgrades to water and wastewater 
systems help optimize water delivery performance, reduce energy usage, 
limit water waste in distribution systems, and enhance modeling of 
sewer collection networks. This will help to improve operations, 
maintenance, and capital expenditure in planning and budgeting, and 
increase spatial and temporal monitoring data available on U.S. water 
quality and quantity.
    One key aspect of smart water networks is advanced metering 
infrastructure (AMI). AMI can offer communities multiple advantages to 
improve their management of water, reducing water and energy waste, and 
decrease costs for distributors, operators, and consumers. Detailed 
consumption data provided by AMI can help reduce water use in many 
ways, including:
  --Detects system leaks--Non-revenue water costs utilities $4.9 
        billion per year. AMI can help drastically reduce water leaks 
        and associated costs by creating a continuous flow of 
        information from advanced meters, combined with advanced data 
        analytics, that enables water suppliers to rapidly and 
        precisely identify water losses and conservation opportunities.
  --Helps consumers save water (and money)--AMI allows for hourly data 
        to be made available to end consumers. Providing this kind of 
        detailed water use information to consumers through an 
        associated consumer engagement application or customer portal 
        is proven to increase conservation, thereby saving consumers 
        money on their monthly water bills.
  --Provides resilience during and following natural disasters--for 
        example, Aclara&#x27;s system in New York City, which serves more 
        than 9 million people, weathered Hurricane Sandy with minimal 
        disruption. Aclara&#x27;s water meter transmission units have a 20 
        year battery life and its data collectors offer a rugged, 
        weather-proofed design that stores 28 days of data with a 14 
        day back up battery life. Deployments offer redundancy so that 
        if an individual data collector is disabled, another collector 
        can continue to obtain meter data for that area, offering 
        resiliency critical after earthquakes, floods or other 
        disasters.
                       natural gas infrastructure
    The U.S. currently has 2.4 million miles of natural gas pipeline 
infrastructure and approximately 400 storage fields, which combined 
carry around 25% of the total energy consumed in the U.S. The low cost 
and relative abundance of natural gas is driving the aggressive 
expansion of new pipeline infrastructure. It is also causing increased 
use of existing infrastructure, putting pressure on an ageing system. 
As our reliance on natural gas continues to expand, so will the 
pressures on our natural gas infrastructure. As such, it is imperative 
that adequate funding be provided for both pressure management--which 
increases the efficiency of natural gas distribution networks--as well 
as methane detection technology, which can reduce the occurrence and 
severity of methane leaks which cost utilities money and can present a 
significant risk to public health.
    Continuous gas pressure monitoring enhances early leak detection by 
recognizing and interpreting gas line pressure fluctuations. A sudden, 
unexplained drop in pressure could be a burst pipe or a gas leak. 
Utilizing an AMI supported gas pressure monitoring system will provide 
utilities with a constant stream of data to alert them to these 
potential issues. Smart pressure monitoring requires a wireless 
communications system including sensors that measure pressure at 
critical points, software that analyses the pressure status at such 
points and calculates responses to achieve a desired pressure, and a 
controller device to prompt smart valves whose use can save energy. 
Smart gas pressure management will allow utilities to better monitor 
and control system gas pressures according to demand. While reducing 
potential leaks, it can also reduce operating cost associated with site 
visits and ``linepack&#x27;&#x27;.
    Advanced leak detection technologies are crucial to curbing methane 
emissions from natural gas pipelines and storage fields and decreasing 
the risk of major gas leaks and accidents. Take, for example, the Aliso 
Canyon methane leak in California, which lasted over four months and 
released approximately 97,100 metric tons of methane into the 
atmosphere (more than the estimated total annual emissions from the 
entire U.S. pipeline infrastructure). Leaks like the one in Aliso 
Canyon demonstrate that the magnitude of risk faced by the natural gas 
industry is great, and that even more substantial risks exist for 
citizens living in the surrounding area and the environment. The key to 
reducing methane leakage--and associated environmental, safety, and 
economic impacts--from natural gas distribution networks is being able 
to locate and close leaks quickly and effectively. While traditional 
infrastructure replacements, upgrades, and periodic monitoring 
technologies do not allow utilities to do this, innovative technology 
is being developed that does.
    Some of this new technology is already on the market. For example, 
Aclara offers several technology-based solutions and pipeline safety 
enhancements for natural gas transmission, storage, and distribution 
companies. Aclara&#x27;s technologies enable continuous remote monitoring 
via infrared point sensing with automatic reads and near real-time 
alarms, which allow utilities to proactively identify potential issue 
areas in their network and significantly reduces the chances of a small 
leak and/or disturbance turning into a catastrophic burn hole. The key 
to this technology is a focus on early detection, which is the most 
essential aspect of effective, proactive risk management and safety 
practices. The technology is also very cost-effective, as it can be 
easily fitted to existing AMI networks and the data it generates can be 
transmitted by existing utility communications networks, thus 
eliminating the high operational costs of data communication charges 
with cellular modems or other cost intensive communication 
technologies.
    We urge Congress to encourage increased coordination with industry 
and U.S. Department of Transportation Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration on methane leak detection technology--
particularly in regards to deployment--and to support investment in 
smart pipeline sensors and controls, internal pipeline inspection and 
repair, and composite and advanced material science technologies. We 
support the expanded use of gas pressure monitoring, both real time and 
hourly, in distribution systems to improve system integrity and safety, 
as further deployments of methane detection sensors closer to the 
consumer would add to overall safety. We also urge Congress to consider 
mandatory use of gas pressure monitoring, both real time and hourly, in 
distribution systems to improve system integrity and safety.
    We urge you to ensure that FY2022 appropriations, as well as any 
potential infrastructure package put together during this congress, 
includes funds for the advancement of technologies that will make our 
electric, water and natural gas distribution networks smarter, safer, 
and more efficient. Again, thank you for providing this opportunity to 
submit testimony.


    [This statement was submitted by Kumi Premathilake, Senior Vice 
President, 
Division Vice President, AMI and Services at Hubbell Utility 
Solutions.]
                                 ______
                                 
          Prepared Statement of the American Geophysical Union
    The American Geophysical Union (AGU), a non-profit, non-partisan 
scientific society, appreciates the opportunity to submit testimony 
regarding the Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 appropriations request for the 
Department of Energy (DOE). AGU, on behalf of its community of 130,000 
in the Earth and space sciences, respectfully requests that the 117th 
Congress appropriate the following:
  --$7.7 billion for DOE Office of Science
  --$500 million for DOE Advanced Research Project Agency--Energy
                          department of energy
    AGU requests that Congress appropriate $7.7 billion for DOE&#x27;s 
Office of Science, which represents a 9.6% increase over FY2021 
spending levels. Additionally, we request $500 million for DOE&#x27;s 
Advanced Research Project Agency--Energy (ARPA-E), which is in line 
with the bipartisan Energy Act of 2020. These funding levels will 
ensure that DOE is able to continue its work to preserve U.S. 
leadership in scientific discovery by developing new cutting-edge 
technology, fostering innovation, and training the nation&#x27;s future 
scientific workforce.
                           office of science
    As the primary funder of basic research in the physical sciences, 
DOE&#x27;s Office of Science is at the forefront of scientific discovery, 
innovation, and the shaping of our nation&#x27;s energy future. The Office 
of Science oversees a breadth of programs and technical infrastructure 
essential to the nation&#x27;s economic growth, energy and national 
security, future scientific and engineering talent, and the development 
of innovative technologies.
    The Office of Science is playing a crucial role in our nation&#x27;s 
fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. Not only has it previously funded 
mRNA research used to develop the vaccine, but it is harnessing its 
supercomputing capabilities to advance our understanding of the 
coronavirus and its spread and creating and distributing better 
personal protective equipment for healthcare workers.
    Through competitive grants awarded to national laboratories, more 
than 300 universities and colleges, and other organizations in all 50 
states and the District of Columbia, the Office of Science fosters 
collaboration between sectors that helps contribute to our nation&#x27;s 
strategic priorities.
    DOE&#x27;s Office of Science also supports more than 34,000 researchers-
including Ph.D. scientists, engineers, graduate students, 
undergraduates, and technical and support personnel--who 
collaboratively work on high-risk, high-reward research projects that 
foster cutting-edge energy technologies. The Office of Science provides 
essential resources and opportunities, including access to 
sophisticated scientific capabilities, beyond those offered by industry 
and academic institutions. The Office of Science has also been critical 
in the creation of industrial breakthroughs and annually partners with 
about fifty Fortune 500 companies as well as small businesses.
    In addition, DOE&#x27;s Office of Science supports exploration of both 
the frontiers of science such as quantum science and technology, 
artificial intelligence, and genomics and advances energy research such 
as solar energy, bioenergy, and batteries that will be the bedrock of 
the country&#x27;s move to clean energy. With a 92% rate of timely 
completion of projects within budget, researchers supported by the 
Office of Science are making key advances in energy and safeguarding 
our nation&#x27;s security by leading us towards energy independence.
    Sustained and robust federal investment in scientific research is 
essential if the U.S. hope to remain globally competitive, especially 
as other countries like China aggressively increase their investments 
in scientific research. Moreover, as our nation recovers from the 
pandemic, the opportunities provided by the Office of Science to 
students, researchers and businesses are critical to help our country 
regain our economic strength and advance our energy security. Overall, 
the DOE Office of Science has been proven to be a smart investment now 
and for the future.
                advanced research project agency-energy
    The Advanced Research Project Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) was 
established to surmount the barriers posed to high-risk, long-term 
energy technology development. In its short ten-year history, ARPA-E 
has supported more than 1,000 projects, 177 of which have attracted 
over $4.9 billion in private-sector follow-on funding, and 88 of which 
have gone on to form new companies. Additionally, ARPA-E is making 
significant contributions to advancing U.S. leadership in cutting edge 
energy science and technology. ARPA-E projects have submitted more than 
4,614 peer-reviewed journal articles and been issued 716 patents by the 
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. ARPA-E has also shown itself to be a 
responsible steward of taxpayer resources by ceasing funding for 
projects that fail to meet milestones.
    We are at a moment when other nations, especially China, Korea, and 
Russia, are making significant investments into advanced energy 
technologies and are poised to seize the economic and geopolitical 
advantages afforded by technological supremacy in this field. With 
global demand for energy projected to increase by almost 30% by 2040--
combined with the often decade long development cycles for energy 
technologies--those nations making commitments to dominate this 
economic opportunity today will be the ones to reap the rewards in the 
years to come. The U.S. is exceptionally well positioned to capitalize 
on key advantages, including the work of cutting-edge agencies such as 
ARPA-E, but only if they are adequately funded.
    Significantly, the transformative clean energy research and 
development funded by ARPA-E is critical to our nation&#x27;s efforts to 
combat climate change. Additionally, ARPA-E &#x27;s investment in scaling up 
transformative solar, geothermal, battery, biofuels and advanced 
surface coating technologies has the potential to drastically alter our 
clean energy landscape.
    Overall, ARPA-E projects create jobs and innovation, enhance our 
national energy security, and boost economic activity in communities 
across the country. Continued and stable investment into this 
transformative program is necessary to ensure its success and bolster 
our nation&#x27;s science and technology leadership.

    [This statement was submitted by Brittany Webster, Program Manager, 
Science Policy &amp; Government Relations.]
                                 ______
                                 
 Prepared Statement of the American Indian Higher Education Consortium
                            request summary
    On behalf of the nation&#x27;s Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) 
that collectively are the American Indian Higher Education Consortium 
(AIHEC), we thank you for this opportunity to share our recommendations 
regarding the Department of Energy (DOE), National Nuclear Security 
Administration&#x27;s (NNSA) Minority Serving Institutions Partnership 
Program (MSIPP).
    Department of Energy (DOE): National Nuclear Security 
Administration--Minority Serving Institutions&#x27; Partnership Program--
Tribal Education Partnership Program (NNSA-MSIPP-TEPP): TCUs urge the 
Subcommittee to continue funding for the newly established Tribal 
Education Partnership Program, a TCU-specific sub-program within the 
NNSA-MSIP, at $5,000,000 for FY2022. With funding from NNSA-MSIPP, the 
TCU Advanced Manufacturing Network Initiative (TCU AMNI) was created 
with a pilot cohort of five TCUs in collaboration with AIHEC. Since 
2015, each of the participating TCUs has established a basic advanced 
manufacturing facility that offers training and education programs with 
support from NNSA National Laboratory partners. TCUs are uniquely 
positioned to catalyze economic transformation in Indian Country, 
because they have the capacity to train a specialized workforce and 
develop critical research and development partnerships with NNSA 
National Laboratories as well as major national companies such as 
Boeing Company and Ford Motor Company.
    The TCU AMNI program provides an important partnership model for 
the Department of Energy and the nation&#x27;s TCUs. The program creates a 
career pipeline for American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) students, 
beginning with the development of technical skills required to operate 
advanced manufacturing systems, which are coming to dominate the global 
manufacturing sector. Students completing technical training at TCUs 
are also prepared to pursue engineering programs, which are in demand 
at all stages of manufacturing. The TCU AMNI program contributes to the 
growth of a well-trained Native workforce: technicians, engineers, 
designers, and entrepreneurs. Through this initiative, TCUs are in a 
strong position to help tribes develop advanced manufacturing 
enterprises, which, in turn, generate significant economic activity and 
create high-skilled jobs for their young people. These efforts will 
contribute to breaking the cycle of poverty that has plagued tribal 
communities for generations.
    TCU efforts in advanced manufacturing have direct economic impacts 
on tribes and have even proven impactful in the field of public health. 
During the current coronavirus pandemic, the Bay Mills Indian Community 
Chairman asked Bay Mills Community College (BMCC) to produce personal 
protective equipment (PPE) for the tribally operated Bay Mills Health 
Center and nearby War Memorial Hospital in the Upper Peninsula of 
Michigan. BMCC collaborated with Lake Superior State University and the 
local school district to 3-D print face mask headgear using a design 
developed by BMCC. BMCC also 3-D printed venturi valves, a component of 
medical ventilators, which were also in short supply, for War Memorial 
Hospital. BMCC worked with the other four ANMI TCUs to produce 3-D 
printed PPEs and other needed medical equipment for their local tribal 
health services providers and the Indian Health Service.
MSIPP TCU Report Language Needed for Funding
    TCU AMNI represents a model for a partnership between the DOE and 
the nation&#x27;s 37 TCUs that can help address the need for a more diverse 
STEM workforce within the NNSA National Laboratory system while 
promoting economic growth in Tribal communities. Historically, the 
competitive MSIPP grant program lacked distinct support for TCUs and 
Tribal communities. In the FY2020 DOE budget, $5 million was explicitly 
provided for a separate TCU program; however, a program was not 
initially established. Instead, the funds were added to the 
competitively awarded MSIPP grant program broadly available to 
Historically Black College and Universities and other Minority Serving 
Institutions. In conducting the FY2020 MSIPP grant competition, NNSA 
did not include provisions specifically for TCUs, nor was an outreach 
strategy implemented to solicit TCU grant applications to ensure that 
TCUs would receive the $5 million in Congressionally directed funding. 
Due to the lack of outreach by NNSA, few TCUs submitted proposals. 
After extensive feedback from AIHEC, NNSA released a new TCU-specific 
sub-grant program under MSIPP entitled: Tribal Education Partnership 
Program. While NNSA eventually took steps to administer Congressionally 
directed TCU funding, we respectfully request that report language and 
funding be included to ensure continuity in the newly established 
Tribal Education Partnership Program.
Success of the TCU Advanced Manufacturing Network Initiative
    The TCU AMPI is creating very promising and exciting projects on 
five TCU campuses. Below are summaries from the five participating 
TCUs.
Navajo Technical University--Crownpoint, NM
    The Center for Digital Technology at Navajo Technical University 
(NTU) in Crownpoint, NM has established an advanced manufacturing 
program with a state-of-the-art facility including metal 3-D printers, 
computer numerical control (CNC) machines and high-tech inspection, and 
validation instrumentation. Students at NTU are developing knowledge 
and skills in design engineering, manufacturing processes, and 
performance analysis. The Navajo Nation is making a significant 
investment in this program and has recruited major industry partners 
for manufacturing contracts resulting in employment for NTU graduates. 
This program provides a model for how TCUs and Tribes can join the 
global manufacturing supply chain ecosystem, generate significant 
economic activity, and train students to join the technology and 
engineering workforce.
Bay Mills Community College--Brimley, MI
    Bay Mills Community College (BMCC), located in the Upper Peninsula 
of Michigan, operates the Great Lakes Composites Institute, a wholly 
owned subsidiary of the college that functions as a Tier II/Tier III 
manufacturing supplier. It has established a technical leadership 
position as a supplier of composite materials and products focusing on 
thermoplastic fiber reinforced polymeric innovations and next-
generation thermoplastic fiber-reinforced products. Industry partners 
include the Army Tank Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
(TARDEC), Ford Motor Company, and the Chrysler Corporation.
Cankdeska Cikana Community College--Fort Totten, ND
    Cankdeska Cikana Community College (CCCC), located in rural North 
Dakota, has developed an advanced manufacturing certificate program 
that builds on an existing engineering program partnership with North 
Dakota State University. CCCC is partnering with the University Centers 
for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) on the design of environmental 
monitoring systems specifically to support local Tribal resource 
management requirements.
Salish Kootenai College--Pablo, MT
    Salish Kootenai College (SKC) has established an Advanced 
Manufacturing Prototyping Lab (AMPL) used for both lab courses and open 
hours for students interested in exploring additive manufacturing 
projects, following the FabLab model. SKC faculty are implementing an 
underwater drone project, similar to that at CCCC, focusing on drones 
capable of carrying instrumentation needed to monitor hydrology, 
biology, and lake sedimentology of Flathead Lake, the largest 
freshwater lake west of the Mississippi River.
Turtle Mountain Community College--Belcourt, ND
    Turtle Mountain Community College (TMCC), located 10 miles from the 
Canada-U.S. border, is expanding their partnership with North Dakota 
State University. The partnership was developed through a collaborative 
engineering program in which students complete their first two years of 
engineering at TMCC and continue on to complete their degree at NDSU. 
The engineering program integrates the college&#x27;s advanced manufacturing 
program, providing students the opportunity to carry out engineering 
design projects and research using the college&#x27;s advanced manufacturing 
facility.
                               conclusion
    Struggling economies are endemic in Indian Country. We ask that 
Congress join us in bringing Tribal nations into the evolving global 
manufacturing community; transforming Tribal economies while addressing 
national energy technology challenges. TCUs provide quality higher 
education opportunities to thousands of AI/ANs and other rural 
residents, as well as essential community programs and services to 
those who might otherwise not have access to such possibilities. The 
modest federal investment in TCUs have paid great dividends in terms of 
employment, education, and economic development. We greatly appreciate 
your previous and your continued support of the nation&#x27;s Tribal 
Colleges and Universities and your careful consideration of our FY2022 
appropriations requests.
                                 ______
                                 
      Prepared Statement of the American Society for Microbiology
    The Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science is a leader in 
advancing critical industries of the future, including quantum 
information science, artificial intelligence, high performance 
computing, advanced communications networks, future energy 
technologies, and engineering biology. As we rise to meet the 
challenges of the 21st Century, microbial science funded by the
    DOE Office of Science remains vitally important. ASM urges Congress 
to fund the DOE Office of Science at $7.7 billion in fiscal year (FY) 
2022, an increase of 9.6% over FY2021. ASM also encourages Congress to 
continue to fully fund the Bioenergy Research Centers at $100 million, 
and the National Microbiome Database Collaborative (NMDC) at $10 
million in FY2022.
    The American Society for Microbiology (ASM) appreciates the 
opportunity to submit outside witness testimony for the Fiscal Year 
2022 Energy and Water Development, and Related Agencies appropriations 
bill in support of increased funding for the Department of Energy 
Office of Science. The American Society for Microbiology (ASM) is one 
of the largest professional societies dedicated to the life sciences 
and is composed of 30,000 scientists and health practitioners. ASM&#x27;s 
mission is to promote and advance the microbial sciences.
    Funding from the DOE Office of Science through the National 
Laboratories, universities, and other programs has generated some of 
our most economically important innovations and is the primary driver 
of basic research in the physical sciences, as well as critical areas 
of genome scale, quantitative analysis of microbial research. This 
support has enabled researchers to use microbes to solve energy and 
environmental problems, and to bring those solutions to scale by 
developing empirical, computational, and mechanistic modeling tools. 
Office of Science funding led to the creation of the Bioenergy Research 
Centers, which support research into viable and sustainable domestic 
biofuel and bioproducts industries. Each of the four Centers is led by 
a DOE national laboratory or university, and each take an innovative 
approach to improving and scaling up advanced biofuel and bioproduct 
production processes. Recent investments in the National Microbiome 
Data Collaborative, an open-source database, will lead to more 
effective analysis of microbiome data and better coordination of 
multidisciplinary microbiome research across the federal government. In 
addition, DOE National Laboratories were effectively deployed in the 
fight against COVID-19, using their supercomputing and modeling 
capabilities to both understand components of the virus and to find 
drug compounds to treat it.
      microbial research is needed to face 21st century challenges
    Our society faces several large, complex, and interconnected 
challenges, many of which can be addressed through microbial research. 
Inexpensive renewable sources of energy, fuels, and chemicals are 
essential for continued economic growth, but the environmental 
tradeoffs of increased energy production must also be considered. 
Microbial science funded by DOE Office of Science can lead the way in 
developing sustainable strategies to feed an ever-growing population by 
increasing plant and agricultural productivity and quality; by 
providing strategies to ensure that future US citizens enjoy clean air, 
water, and a high standard of living; in transforming human health by 
providing everything from new pharmaceuticals, reagents for precision 
medicine, and next generation antibiotics; and by producing cost-
competitive fuels, chemicals, and materials from abundant renewable 
resources. These and other advances in decarbonization, the production 
of biomaterials or bio-based polymers, and others based on new 
microbial catalysts will only happen with strong, stable investments in 
the Office of Science.
    Discoveries in targeted areas such as quantum science and 
technology, genomics, microelectronics, and machine learning have 
potential far-reaching impacts that spawn the creation of new 
industries. For example, DOE has also taken the lead on bio-based 
energy, fuel and chemicals innovation. The Office of Science currently 
funds four Bioenergy Research Centers (BRC), which support research 
into viable and sustainable domestic biofuel and bioproducts 
industries. These four Centers are developing viable and sustainable 
domestic biofuels and bioproducts derived from non-food plant biomass, 
such as poplar, switchgrass, and sorghum. This research will lead to 
lower greenhouse gas emissions, bring jobs to rural areas, and boost 
our energy security, and we strongly encourage Congress to continue 
fully funding the BRCs at $100 million in FY2022.
            doe-funded microbiome research spawns innovation
    In its stewardship of innovation at DOE&#x27;s National Laboratories, 
universities, and other programs, the Office of Science is a critical 
partner in advancing areas of national need, supporting research in key 
emerging areas including artificial intelligence and microbiome 
research. Thousands of projects funded by NIH and NSF utilize DOE 
facilities each year, and more than fifty Fortune 500 companies and 
many small businesses use these facilities to conduct the underlying 
research required to develop new technologies and products that drive 
the economy, including the growing bioeconomy.
    Microbiome science aims to advance understanding of microbial 
communities (microbiomes) for applications in areas such as health 
care, food production, and environmental restoration to benefit 
individuals, communities, and the environment. Understanding of the 
microbiome has evolved significantly since the concept of the human 
microbiome emerged roughly two decades ago. Today it is understood that 
microbial communities exist on, in, and around people, plants, animals, 
soil, oceans, and the atmosphere, making the microbiome relevant to all 
living things. The rapid pace of discovery has led to greater 
technology needs and data sharing infrastructure.
    The Interagency Strategic Plan for Microbiome Research, FY2018-
2022, developed by the Microbiome Interagency Working Group (MIWG), 
provides recommendations for improving coordination of microbiome 
research among Federal agencies and between agencies and nonFederal 
domestic and international microbiome research efforts. The five-year 
Strategic Plan coordinates microbiome research activities across 21 
government agencies, describing the interagency objectives, structure 
and operating principles, and research focus areas and provided three 
recommended areas to transform microbiome discoveries to solutions:
    1. Supporting interdisciplinary and collaborative research to 
enable a predictive understanding of the function of microbiomes in 
diverse ecosystems to enhance public health, food, and environmental 
security and grow new bioeconomy product areas.
    2. Developing platform technologies to generate critical insights 
and to improve access to and sharing of microbiome data across 
ecosystems.
    3. Expanding the microbiome workforce through educational 
opportunities, citizen science, and public engagement.
    Recent advances in DNA sequencing technologies have increased our 
awareness of the complexity and diversity in networks of 
microorganisms. Yet there remains much to discover regarding how 
microbiomes function as communities, interact with their hosts and 
environment, and how they can be leveraged to improve health and 
ecosystems. As noted in the Interagency
    Strategic Plan for Microbiome Research, microbiome data is ``Big 
Data&#x27;&#x27;, which requires consistent and reliable database and resource 
coordination to facilitate data collection, analysis, interoperability, 
and data sharing. The NMDC is aimed at empowering this type of 
microbiome research. Spearheaded by Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, in partnership with Los Alamos, Oak Ridge, and Pacific 
Northwest national laboratories, the NMDC is leveraging DOE&#x27;s existing 
data-science resources and high-performance computing systems to 
develop a framework that facilitates more efficient use of microbiome 
data for applications in energy, environment, health, and agriculture. 
In support of these ongoing efforts, ASM requests continued funding of 
$10 million for the National Microbiome Database Collaborative (NMDC) 
for FY2022.
    Our nation&#x27;s ability to make significant advances in solving energy 
and environmental problems depends on advances in the microbial 
sciences. This will only be possible if Congress continues its 
commitment to robust and sustained funding increases for the Department 
of Energy&#x27;s Office of Science.

    [This statement was submitted by Allen Segal, Director of Public 
Policy and 
Advocacy, American Society for Microbiology.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the American Society of Plant Biologists
    On behalf of the American Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB), we 
submit this written testimony to support $7.7 billion for the 
Department of Energy&#x27;s (DOE) Office of Science in fiscal year (FY) 
2022. Within this amount, ASPB supports proportional increases in 
funding for the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the Office of 
Biological and Environmental Research. ASPB also supports at least $500 
million for the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) in FY 
2022. ARPA-E has proven to be an innovative and valuable program that 
advances high-impact energy technologies, including biotechnology, 
imaging, carbon capture, and sustainable crop systems that are 
important to the plant science community and to the nation.
    The following testimony highlights the importance of biology-
particularly plant biology, which is a necessary backbone of efforts to 
enhance bioenergy production-as the nation seeks to address energy 
security and other vital issues. We thank the Subcommittee for its 
consideration of this testimony and for its support for the basic 
research mission of the DOE Office of Science. ASPB recognizes the 
difficult fiscal environment our nation faces but believes investments 
in scientific research will be a critical step toward economic 
recovery.
    ASPB, founded in 1924 as the American Society of Plant 
Physiologists, was established to promote the growth and development of 
plant biology, to encourage and publish research in plant biology, and 
to promote the interests and professional advancement of plant 
scientists in general. ASPB members educate, mentor, advise, and 
nurture future generations of plant biologists; they work to increase 
understanding of plant biology, as well as science in general, in K-16 
schools and among the general public; they advocate in support of plant 
biology research; they work to convey the relevance and importance of 
plant biology; and they provide expertise in policy decisions world-
wide. Overall, ASPB members, as representatives of the society, work to 
disseminate information and excitement about plant sciences, especially 
through ASPB&#x27;s advocacy, outreach activities, conferences, and 
publications.
    fuel, food, environment, and health: plant biology research and 
                            america&#x27;s future
    Plants are vital to our very existence. They harvest sunlight, 
converting it to chemical energy for food and feed; they take up carbon 
dioxide and produce oxygen; and they are essential to life on Earth. 
Indeed, plant biology research is making many fundamental contributions 
in the areas of domestic fuel security and environmental stewardship; 
the continued and sustainable development of better fuels, foods, 
fabrics, pharmaceuticals, and building materials; and in the 
understanding of basic biological principles that underpin improvements 
in plant growth and home-grown energy sources for all Americans.
    In particular, plant biology is at the center of numerous 
scientific breakthroughs in the increasingly interdisciplinary world of 
alternative energy research. For example, researchers at National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) just published research that 
demonstrates the ability to convert wet waste carbon (food waste 
derived from fatty acids) to sustainable aviation fuels-highlighting 
the potential to simultaneously and synergistically address aviation 
needs and environmental challenges. Similarly, with the increase in 
plant genome sequencing and functional genomics, the interface of plant 
biology and computer science has become essential to our understanding 
of complex biological systems, ranging from single cells to entire 
ecosystems. This research is critical for our future bioenergy 
production.
    Despite the fact that foundational and mission-oriented plant 
biology research-the kind of research DOE funds-underpins vital 
advances in practical applications in energy, health, and the 
environment, plant scientists have had to maximize and leverage modest 
federal funding to understand the basic function and mechanisms of 
plants. Sustained strong investments in plant biology research are 
important considering the significant positive impact crop plants have 
on the nation&#x27;s economy and in addressing some of our most urgent 
challenges, like energy and food security. For example, continued basic 
and applied research in fields like synthetic biology will enable the 
creation and production of more energy dense, carbon neutral fuels and 
expand the production of energy-efficient biomass.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ https://roadmap.ebrc.org/energy/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Nearly 10 years ago, ASPB organized a two-phase Plant Science 
Research Summit with support and funding from DOE, the National Science 
Foundation, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute. The Summit brought together representatives from 
across the full spectrum of plant science research to develop a 
research agenda and resulted in a report-Unleashing a Decade of 
Innovation in Plant Science: A Vision for 2015-2025.\2\ This vision has 
helped guide our community towards significant gains in foundational 
and applied plant science. Importantly, novel crop varieties and 
precision agriculture technologies are producing more food per acre 
with less exogenous inputs. However, as climate change continues to 
threaten our agriculture systems, the work of the plant science 
research community is more pressing than ever. Additional significant 
progress is possible, but will require a bold commitment of resources 
from the federal government. As a research community, our continued 
vision is to create plant systems that are flexible and adaptable to 
both new and existing challenges by increasing the predictive and 
synthetic abilities of plant biology. In achieving these goals, the 
plant science research community will make significant contributions 
to:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ plantsummit.files.wordpress.com/2013/07/
plantsciencedecadalvision10-18-13.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  --Exploring, conserving, and utilizing our natural resources;
  --Protecting, maintaining, and improving energy crop productivity;
  --Creating new plant-inspired bioproducts, companies, and industries; 
        and
  --Reducing the environmental impact and energy footprint of 
        agriculture.
               securing the plant science talent pipeline
    As discussed above, many of the challenges that come with our 
changing world must be addressed specifically by plant scientists. A 
significant--but sustainable--increase in crop productivity will be 
needed to match the demand for food expected from the rate of 
population growth. At the same time, climate change will present new 
trials for crops and other plant ecosystems. These challenges will 
require efforts to increase productivity beyond current practices, 
including improvement in crop water use efficiency and enhanced crop 
photosynthesis efficiency and performance, to name just a few 
approaches. More knowledge and innovation will be needed to replace 
chemicals from non-renewable sources (from fuels to biomedical 
applications) with plant-derived metabolites. These types of 
innovations will require contributions from basic and applied plant 
science fields and collaboration with other sciences, computation, and 
engineering.
    To tackle these challenges, a strong and diverse community of plant 
scientists, with increased involvement from women and marginalized 
scientists, will be needed. However, the current training pipeline does 
not appear prepared to ensure the availability of this workforce. 
Overall, the number of Ph.D. degrees awarded in the US in biomedical 
sciences in the last two decades has increased at an unsustainable 
rate, even triggering warnings from members of the National Academy of 
Sciences; however, this trend has not been paralleled by increases in 
plant-related Ph.D. degrees. In fact, plant science doctoral degrees, 
both basic and agronomy-related, have remained stagnant during this 
time period. Clearly, a strong investment in plant science research, 
both basic and applied, renewed efforts to transform public perceptions 
of plant biology and plant biologists, and a push to increase the 
number of students entering the pipeline leading to plant science 
degrees are necessary to change these trends. Developing the workforce 
that will contribute the solutions to future challenges is urgent.
    With this need in mind, ASPB applauds the awards DOE has made in 
training the next generation of scientists. Most recently, DOE has 
invested $20 million at the Oak Ridge Institute with the goal of 
training 150 Ph.D.s in energy related fields in the next five years. 
More investments like this, including outreach to women and individuals 
in marginalized groups, is vital for the US to maintain its energy 
leadership.
                          doe recommendations
    Because the ASPB membership has extensive expertise and 
participation in the academic, industry, and government research 
sectors, ASPB is in an excellent position to articulate the nation&#x27;s 
plant science priorities as they relate to fundamental plant biology 
and, specifically, with regard to recommendations for bioenergy 
research funding through DOE&#x27;s Office of Science.
    Within the Office of Science, the programs in Biological and 
Environmental Research (BER) and Basic Energy Sciences (BES) are 
crucial to understanding how basic biological processes operate. 
Sustained funding for these programs is vital, because the discoveries 
made in these areas will ultimately be the foundation for the next 
fuels and technologies we use in our daily lives.
    Support from ARPA-E is critical to advancing plant synthetic 
biology technologies, and ASPB implores the committee to include 
sustained, targeted funding for synthetic biology research in the 
program.
    In addition:
  --We commend the DOE Office of Science, through its programs in BES 
        and BER, for having funded the Bioenergy Research Centers and 
        the Energy Frontier Research Centers. These centers provide a 
        model for collective science innovation that complements DOE&#x27;s 
        essential investment in individual investigator and small group 
        science. ASPB strongly encourages additional funding for the 
        DOE Office of Science that would specifically target funding at 
        individual and small-group grants for bioenergy and plant 
        growth research.
  --Considerable research interest is now focused on the processing of 
        plant biomass for energy production. Fundamental discoveries of 
        the genes that control plant growth and enable plant growth in 
        response to stresses, including drought, are needed to secure 
        our energy future. If biomass crops, including woody plants, 
        are to be used to their full potential, extensive effort must 
        be expended to improve our understanding of their basic biology 
        and development, as well as their agronomic performance and 
        conversion efficiency in processing to fuels and high-value co-
        products. Therefore, ASPB calls for DOE to support research 
        targeted at efforts to increase the utility and agronomic 
        performance of bioenergy feedstocks, both in the field and for 
        their end users in the bioeconomy.
    Thank you for your consideration of our testimony on behalf of the 
American Society of Plant Biologists. For more information about the 
American Society of Plant Biologists, please see www.aspb.org.
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply 
               System and Dry Prairie Rural Water System
                    fiscal year 2022 budget request
    The Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System and Dry Prairie 
Rural Water System respectfully request FY 2022 appropriations of 
$17.760 million, part of the Bureau of Reclamation Rural Water Program 
(Table 1).
    The FY 2022 federal funding request is $7.021 million for the 
Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System (ASRWSS) and $10.739 
million for the Dry Prairie Rural Water System (DPRWS) to fully 
complete project construction. The combined request leaves a projected 
appropriation of $548,000 in FY 2023 to account for final indexing and 
any adjustments for non-federal cost shares or other.


    The project expresses the greatest appreciation to the Chairman and 
Subcommittee for its unwavering support during the construction of this 
vital infrastructure in a vast area of Montana.
    FY 2022 funds will be used to construct all remaining important 
elements of the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System, Montana, (PL 
106-382, October 27, 2000). The request is within the capability to 
spend funds in FY 2022. Design, cultural resource surveys, wetland 
surveys, and easements related to all proposed project features will be 
completed by the ASRWSS and Dry Prairie and approved by Reclamation in 
advance of the use of FY 2022 funds. Those activities are already 
underway on most FY 2022 projects.
                    project status and funding needs
    As shown in Table 2, the overall project will be 94% complete at 
the end of FY 2021. ASRWSS will be 97% complete, and DPRWS will be 89% 
complete. ASRWSS has built the regional intake, water treatment plant 
and all main transmission interconnections that serve both ASRWSS and 
Dry Prairie.
    Construction funds remaining to be spent after FY 2021 total 
$17.759 million within the current authorization, including a projected 
federal overrun on Dry Prairie of $4.285 million (in October 2020 
dollars). FY 2022 appropriations at the level requested will leave a 
projected need for $548,000 in FY 2023 to adjust for inflation at the 
rate experienced over the last 5 years (3.72%), for final adjustment of 
non-federal cost shares and for other adjustments necessary to complete 
the project.


    The ASRWSS project features to complete its Reservation portion of 
project are currently under budget by $726,000. The ASRWSS portion of 
the project can be completed if appropriations cited above are 
available in FY 2022. The funds currently under budget will be spent on 
beneficial and federally approvable projects within the authorized 
construction ceiling.
    Congress has authorized three amendments of PL 106-382 to extend 
the project completion most recently to December 31, 2026. The project 
funding will be completed in FY 2022 unless there are significant 
reductions in appropriations for the rural water program in FY 2022.
                            project history
    The project has reached 94% completion over a period of 20 years 
(averaging about 4.7% completion annually). Continued Congressional 
support is needed for the Reclamation Rural Water Program to complete 
our currently authorized project funding in FY 2022. Fixed annual 
overhead costs have reduced funding that can be allocation to 
construction of project features because the project was required to 
build over twice the number of years anticipated at authorization. 
Despite the additional overhead costs, the project will be completed 
within budget, subject to a current federal project cost overrun on Dry 
Prairie of $4.285 million that resulted unexpectedly due to lower 
indexing in FY 2020 due to the COVID 19 pandemic. The expected indexing 
based on historic trends was not enough to cover actual increases in 
unit prices for construction. Dry Prairie is working with Reclamation 
to reduce the overrun.
    ASRWSS and DPRWS have worked extremely well and closely with the 
Bureau of Reclamation since the authorization of the project in FY 
2000. The Commissioner, Regional, and Area Offices of the Bureau of 
Reclamation have been consistently in agreement with the need, scope, 
total costs, and the ability to pay analysis that supported the federal 
and non-federal cost shares. There have been no areas of disagreement 
or controversy in the formulation or implementation of the project.
                                 ______
                                 
                   Prepared Statement of Aurora Water
    I am requesting your support for appropriations in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery 
Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation Program. 
The budget items and amounts requested in the President&#x27;s budget for 
these programs are described below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    I appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Marshall Brown, General Manager, 
Aurora Water.]
                                 ______
                                 
                   Prepared Statement of Aurora Water
    I am requesting your support for appropriations in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery 
Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation Program. 
The budget items and amounts requested in the President&#x27;s budget for 
these programs are described below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    I appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Marshall Brown, General Manager, 
Aurora Water.]
                                 ______
                                 
      Prepared Statement of the Building Performance Association, 
          E4TheFuture, and the Building Performance Institute
    As leaders in the residential energy efficiency industry, the 
Building Performance Association, E4TheFuture, and the Building 
Performance Institute respectfully urge your support, through the 
Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Energy and Water Development Appropriations bill, 
to provide robust funding to advance programs at the Department of 
Energy (DOE) that invest in residential energy efficiency and whole-
house initiatives. The President&#x27;s FY 2022 budget request makes 
significant investments in the Weatherization Assistance Program, State 
Energy Program, and Building Technologies Office. For the many reasons 
detailed below, we urge Congress to continue support for these programs 
and work to ensure that sub accounts within the DOE Office of Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy are robustly funded so that their 
important work may continue and expand. On behalf of our stakeholders 
and members, we thank you for this opportunity to express our support 
for these important programs and initiatives that pay for themselves 
many times over and are a wise and modest investment that help 
Americans save money, improve energy security, and live and work in 
safe and comfortable buildings.
    The Building Performance Association (BPA) is a membership-driven 
501(c)6 industry association dedicated to advancing the home and 
building performance industry by delivering improved energy efficiency, 
health, safety, and environmental performance of buildings through our 
key stakeholders. With over 9,500 member companies operating in every 
state, BPA supports home performance contractors, weatherization 
agencies and training centers, product manufacturers and distributors, 
program sponsors and implementers, building scientists, and non-profits 
focused on residential and commercial energy efficiency.
    E4TheFuture is non-profit 501c(3) organization which collaborates 
with industry stakeholders to provide expert policy solutions, 
education, and advocacy to advance residential clean energy and energy 
efficiency solutions on the federal, state and local level.
    The Building Performance Institute (BPI) is the nation&#x27;s premier 
building performance credentialing, quality assurance, and standards 
setting organization. Approved by the American National Standards 
Institute, Inc. (ANSI) as an accredited developer of American National 
Standards and as a certifying body for personnel credentials, BPI 
develops technical standards and professional certifications that help 
raise the bar in home performance contracting.
    BPA, E4TheFuture, and BPI offer their strong support for DOE&#x27;s 
residential efficiency programs and initiatives, as they are critical 
to the continued growth of the energy efficiency industry across the 
country. Public programs that support the energy efficiency industry 
are vital as it continues to develop and, as evidenced by a grassroots 
letter from U.S. taxpayers \1\ to House and Senate Energy and Water 
Appropriations subcommittee leadership, there is tremendous public 
support for these programs. The grassroots letter includes signatures 
from over 1,160 U.S. taxpayers from 48 states plus the District of 
Columbia.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ https://e4thefuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/FY22-
Appropriations-Sign-On.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Energy efficiency equals jobs--it is the largest employer and 
fastest growing sector in the energy industry. The 2020 ``Energy 
Efficiency Jobs in America&#x27;&#x27; \2\ report from E4TheFuture found that the 
energy efficiency industry employs nearly 2.4 million Americans and, 
prior to the pandemic, was adding more jobs than any other energy 
sector. Through 2019, the energy efficiency industry featured twice as 
many workers as the entire U.S. fossil fuel industry and led the 
nation&#x27;s energy economy in new job creation. The industry was expected 
to see another 3% growth in 2020. Instead, over 18% of the energy 
efficiency workforce (430,000 workers) lost their jobs in the initial 
months of the COVID-19 pandemic.\3\ While other sectors experienced 
robust recoveries in the second half of 2020, energy efficiency did 
not: In December 2020, over half of energy efficiency workers laid off 
in the spring (230,000) were still out of work. A significant portion 
of the energy efficiency jobs in the U.S. are in the residential 
sector, and approximately 56 percent of energy efficiency jobs involve 
construction and repairs. These are the contractors--the ``boots on the 
ground&#x27;&#x27;--installing energy efficiency products and technologies and 
working to reduce energy waste in homes and buildings across the 
country. These local, family-sustaining jobs exist all across the 
country. In fact, 99.9% of U.S. counties have energy efficiency jobs 
and nearly 400,000 of these jobs are in rural areas.\4\ Residential 
energy efficiency jobs were hit particularly hard by the pandemic and 
statewide lockdown orders. Supporting these jobs as part of our 
nation&#x27;s recovery will be critical.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ https://e4thefuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/
EE_Jobs_America_2020.pdf.
    \3\ https://e2.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Clean-Energy-Jobs-
December-COVID-19-Memo-Final-Revised.pdf.
    \4\ https://e2.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/E2-2021-Clean-Jobs-
America-Report-04-19-2021.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Dollar for dollar, investments in energy efficiency create more 
jobs than investment in the utility sector or fossil-fuels,\5\ and 
investments in DOE programs that support energy efficiency--like the 
Building Technologies Office, Weatherization Assistance Program, and 
State Energy Program--lead to job creation and economic growth. For 
example, investment in weatherization creates direct jobs in sales and 
installation and indirect jobs in equipment manufacturing and 
distribution.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ ACEEE. N.d. Energy Efficiency and Economic Opportunity. 
Retrieved from http://aceee.org/files/pdf/fact-sheet/ee-economic-
opportunity.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In addition to economic and jobs benefits, residential energy 
efficiency also plays a key role in public health. A DOE report on the 
Weatherization Assistance Program \6\ found that home improvements 
focused on energy efficiency can improve indoor air quality, which 
reduces respiratory illness and sick days, and improves mental 
alertness and productivity for both children and adults. Two additional 
reports from 2016--E4TheFuture&#x27;s ``Occupant Health Benefits of 
Residential Energy Efficiency&#x27;&#x27; \7\ and the U.S. Department of Energy&#x27;s 
``HomeRx: The Health Benefits of Home Performance&#x27;&#x27; \8\--also found 
that residential energy efficiency upgrades can help to address asthma 
triggers and other chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD), 
leading to reduced healthcare costs. Under the pandemic, these health 
co-benefits from residential energy efficiency have grown even more 
vital.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ https://energy.gov/eere/wipo/downloads/weatherization-
assistance-program-national-evaluation.
    \7\ https://e4thefuture.org/occupant-health-benefits-of-
residential-energy-efficiency/.
    \8\ https://energy.gov/eere/buildings/downloads/home-rx-health-
benefits-home-performance-review-current-evidence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Promoting building efficiency is also vital to achieving carbon 
reduction goals. Buildings are responsible for 31% of all U.S. 
greenhouse gas emissions,\9\ and are therefore critical to any 
emissions reduction strategy. A recent report from ACEEE found that 
energy efficiency alone can cut energy use and U.S. greenhouse gas 
emissions in half by 2050, and buildings deliver 33% of the total 
emissions reductions in the report&#x27;s model.\10\ The residential 
buildings sector in particular remains largely untapped. Residential 
buildings account for 21% of total U.S. energy consumption,\11\ use 
more electricity than any other sector,\12\ and are the largest 
contributor to peak demand.\13\ Addressing this sector is essential 
from a carbon emissions reduction standpoint.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \9\ Total combined emissions from the residential and commercial 
sectors with electricity-related emissions distributed. https://
www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2019-04/documents/us-ghg-inventory-
2019-main-text.pdf.
    \10\ https://aceee.org/sites/default/files/publications/
researchreports/u1907.pdf.
    \11\ https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/mer.pdf.
    \12\ https://www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/html/epa_01_02.html.
    \13\ https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/04/f61/bto-
geb_overview-4.15.19.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The below programs at the Department of Energy deserve the support 
of the American taxpayer as these programs are proven to provide a 
significant return on investment. When funded they will continue to 
provide energy cost relief to households, support American-based 
industry and American jobs, ameliorate issues with the aging electrical 
grid, and support national security goals. We also urge additional 
funding either through regular appropriations or supplemental funding 
in the event an energy/infrastructure package is considered. In the 
event that opportunity presents itself, we would urge:
    1. Title VI of the House-passed, FY21 House Energy and Water 
Development Appropriations Bill as a starting point to fund the State 
Energy Program (SEP) ($730 million--$3.8 billion if adjusted for 
inflation from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act [ARRA]) (for 
base, formula funds), Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP) ($3.25 
billion--$6.2 billion if adjusted for inflation from ARRA) ; and
    2. the HOPE for HOMES program to advance workforce training and 
residential retrofit rebates supported by the President&#x27;s Budget 
Request ($2 billion in FY22).
                  regular fy22 appropriations requests
    $80 M for Residential Buildings Integration program within the 
Building Technologies Office (BTO), which has the capacity to 
fundamentally transform the performance of homes and greatly improve 
the energy efficiency in the 115 million existing residential buildings 
throughout this country. As mentioned above, residential buildings 
account for 21% of total U.S. energy consumption, use more electricity 
than any other sector, and are therefore an essential (albeit often 
overlooked) part of the carbon reduction equation. RBI can 
significantly improve the energy efficiency in the residential sector 
through its partnerships with the thousands of small businesses in this 
sector, the construction trades, equipment, smart grid technology and 
systems suppliers, integrators and state and local governments. To 
date, approximately 950,000 energy efficiency improvement projects have 
been completed on existing homes through the Home Performance with 
ENERGY STAR program. We recommend that this program receive a line item 
in the budget for at least $80 million and that the funding be focused 
on facilitating later-stage research, demonstration, and widespread 
deployment of technology solutions in new and existing homes, with an 
emphasis on whole-house energy efficiency retrofits (including 
outreach, engagement and training to private sector contractors) and 
continuing efforts to advance grid-interactive residential buildings 
and smart home technology. We encourage the direct engagement with 
residential contractors and businesses, which are crucial to the 
success of buildings programs. The President&#x27;s FY22 budget supports 
increasing funding for this program to $72 million, but we respectfully 
urge Congress to fund Residential Buildings Integration at no less than 
$80 million.
    $90 M for State Energy Program (SEP). We urge the Committee to 
provide funding of at least $90 million for SEP, which provides funding 
and technical assistance to states, territories, and the District of 
Columbia to enhance energy security, advance state-led energy 
initiatives, and maximize the benefits of decreasing energy waste. The 
President&#x27;s FY22 budget supports increasing funding for this program, 
but we request that at least $90M of funding be used for direct formula 
grants to the states. Over the past 30 years, SEP has proven to be the 
critical link in helping states improve efficiency in hospitals and 
schools, establish business incubators and job training programs, and 
establish relationships with energy service companies and small 
businesses to implement cost-effective energy efficiency programs 
across their state. The Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) found that 
every dollar invested in SEP by the federal government yields over $10 
leveraged for energy-related economic development and realizes $7.22 in 
energy cost savings for U.S. citizens and businesses--a tremendous 
economic value. SEP provides extraordinary value and flexibility, which 
is why governors across the country strongly support continued funding. 
It is important to note that SEP defers to the governors all decisions 
on allocating resources provided by DOE to meet their states&#x27; 
priorities such as energy emergency planning and response and energy 
related economic development.
    $360 M for Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP). We ask the 
Committee to provide funding of at least $360 million for WAP, which 
helps low-income and rural families, seniors, and individuals with 
disabilities make lasting energy efficiency improvements to their 
homes. WAP has a proven track record of creating new jobs and 
contributing to the economy through the program&#x27;s large supply chain of 
vendors, suppliers, and manufacturers. Since 1976, WAP has helped make 
more than 8 million homes more efficient, saving the average recipient 
about $4,200 over the lifetime of their home. A peer-reviewed study 
from ORNL found that the program is cost-effective at even conservative 
levels of evaluation. Each dollar that goes toward weatherization 
assistance yields at least $2.30 in benefits, and by some estimates as 
much as $4.10 to the home and society. The President&#x27;s FY22 budget 
request proposes a significant increase to WAP, funding the program at 
$390M. We respectfully ask the Committee to continue support for the 
program in Fiscal Year 2022 in order to assist America&#x27;s low- and 
moderate-income citizens.
    Aside from the very important programs noted above, BPA, 
E4TheFuture, and BPI would like to request the Committee support the 
U.S. Energy and Employment Report (USEER) within the Department of 
Energy. The annual USEER is an invaluable resource for both employers 
and policymakers and, in this moment of economic turmoil, supporting 
the report is particularly critical. Funding from DOE makes USEER 
possible every year. Without future reports, the economic fallout from 
the pandemic and its impacts on the energy sector nationwide will not 
be fully recorded, depriving decisionmakers of crucial employment 
information.
    In addition, we respectfully ask the Committee to support existing 
training programs that fund clean energy and energy efficiency jobs 
within the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE). 
These EERE workforce development programs assist and support workers in 
trades and activities required for the continued growth of the U.S. 
energy efficiency and clean energy sectors. Seismic shifts in the 
energy workforce caused by COVID-19 have underlined the continuing need 
for these programs. We urge the Committee to support the USEER, funded 
at $2 million in FY22, as well as these workforce development programs 
within EERE.
    In conclusion, BPA, E4TheFuture, and BPI offer their strong support 
for DOE&#x27;s residential efficiency programs and initiatives, as they are 
critical to the continued advancement of the energy efficiency 
industry, which contributes to the country&#x27;s overall economic growth, 
energy independence, and international competitiveness, and also 
represents a significant and largely untapped resource for carbon 
reduction. Public programs that support the energy efficiency industry 
are vital as it continues to develop and there is tremendous public 
support for these programs. The very small investments in the programs 
discussed above pay for themselves many times over and are a wise and 
modest investment that help Americans save money, improve energy 
security, and live and work in safe and comfortable buildings. Again, 
thank you for providing this opportunity to submit testimony. We look 
forward to working with you.

    [This statement was submitted by Steve Skodak, President &amp; CEO, 
Building Performance Association,Stephen Cowell, President, 
E4TheFuture, and Larry Zarker, CEO, Building Performance Institute.]
                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of the Business Council for Sustainable Energy
    The Business Council for Sustainable Energy (BCSE) urges Congress 
to make clean energy and demand-side energy efficiency central to 
infrastructure improvement measures enacted in the 117th Congress, with 
a focus on resilience and improved public health and safety. A key 
aspect of rebuilding our nation&#x27;s infrastructure will be to enact 
robust funding for clean energy programs managed by federal agencies, 
in particular the Department of Energy, in the FY2022 Energy and Water 
Development Appropriations bill. A document containing clean energy 
industry funding requests for BCSE members in the renewable energy, 
energy efficiency and natural gas sectors for the FY2022 Energy and 
Water Appropriations Bill can be found here for your reference.
    Federal investment in clean energy innovation has received 
bipartisan support because Congress recognizes the United States of 
America must lead the world in sustainable energy technologies to meet 
the need for grid reliability and safety, while boosting economic 
growth and reducing environmental impacts.
    For these reasons, the Business Council for Sustainable Energy 
urges Congress to continue to adequately fund Department of Energy 
(DOE) clean energy programs for the offices of Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy (EERE), Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FE), 
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability (EDER), Advanced Research 
Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) and other essential DOE clean energy 
programs. These federal research development and deployment funds can 
be used to leverage business investment to accelerate deployment and 
emissions reductions in all sectors of the economy.
    The BCSE is a coalition of companies and trade associations from 
the energy efficiency, energy storage, natural gas, renewable energy, 
sustainable transportation and emerging decarbonization technology 
sectors. It includes independent electric power producers, investor-
owned utilities, public utilities, equipment manufacturers, commercial 
end users and service providers in energy and environmental markets. 
Founded in 1992, the coalition&#x27;s diverse business membership is united 
around the revitalization of the U.S. economy and the creation of a 
clean, secure and reliable energy future in America.
    The BCSE is pleased to have an independent small- and medium-size 
businesses initiative under its banner, the Clean Energy Business 
Network (CEBN). Together, the BCSE and CEBN represent a broad range of 
the clean energy economy, from Fortune 100 companies to small 
businesses working in all 50 states and over 350 Congressional 
districts. On a national basis, these industries support over 3 million 
U.S. jobs.
    The 2021 Sustainable Energy in America Factbook recently released 
by the BCSE and BloombergNEF shows that despite major headwinds brought 
about due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the transformation of how the U.S. 
produces, delivers, and consumes hydrocarbons, electrons and heat 
marched onward.
    Congress has the opportunity to build on market conditions by 
funding research, development and deployment across a broad portfolio 
of technologies and industries, including energy efficiency and CHP, 
hydropower and marine energy, geothermal energy, wind, solar, energy 
storage, microgrids, carbon management and utilization, hydrogen, 
critical minerals, sustainable transportation and others to meet the 
need for grid reliability and safety, while boosting economic growth 
and reducing environmental damage.
    The Council welcomes the opportunity to share information from the 
Factbook with you and we look forward to working with you throughout 
the FY2022 budget cycle.

    [This statement was submitted by Lisa Jacobson, President, Business 
Council for Sustainable Energy.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the Carbon Utilization Research Council
    Summary of CURC FY 2022 Recommendation: The Carbon Utilization 
Research Council (``CURC&#x27;&#x27;) is an industry coalition focused on 
technology solutions for the responsible use of our fossil energy 
resources in a balanced, low carbon generation portfolio.\1\ CURC 
recommends $1,388,250,000 for the CCUS &amp; Power Systems Program, funded 
by the Fossil Energy Research and Development (FE R&amp;D) budget.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ For more information, please visit www.curc.net.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Benefits of Investment in Carbon Management Technologies: 
Deployment of carbon management technologies including carbon capture, 
utilization, and storage (CCUS) will have emissions reductions 
benefits, contribute to a growing economy, and play a critical role in 
the ongoing energy transition. In addition to providing low-carbon, 
dispatchable electricity to load follow intermittent renewables on the 
electric grid, CCUS provides a mean to reduce emissions from hard-to-
decarbonize industrial processes including cement production and 
steelmaking and can help to create low- and zero- carbon fuels 
including hydrogen that have a wide variety of applications to 
decarbonize transportation, hard-to-abate industries, and provide long 
term, seasonal storage for the grid. International climate authorities 
like the International Energy Agency have determined that reaching 
economywide net-zero emissions in any scenario is ``virtually 
impossible&#x27;&#x27; without CCUS.
    Federal investment in CCUS RD&amp;D will also substantially benefit 
U.S. economic competitiveness, as the technology will allow us to 
maintain existing jobs and expertise in incumbent industries in 
addition to creating new, high-wage jobs in the energy and 
manufacturing sectors.
CURC-EPRI Roadmap:
    CURC and the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) continuously 
evaluate technology needs that reflect changing markets and policies 
that impact fossil fuel use in the electric sector, which are 
communicated through an Advanced Technology Roadmap. The Roadmap 
identifies a suite of CCUS technologies that, if implemented, can 
deliver low carbon emission, fossil-fueled power plants between 2025-
2035 that are cost-competitive with other sources of electricity. 
Several technologies identified in the Roadmap are readying for large-
scale pilot testing while others are preparing for commercial 
demonstration. It is critical that a program is implemented to 
successfully commercialize these technologies to successfully meet any 
proposed net-zero objectives. This means annual federal budgets must 
increase to support the scale-up effort.
Federal Support of RD&amp;D:
    The U.S. has been a leader in the development of fossil energy 
technology with the support of the DOE&#x27;s world class CCUS RD&amp;D 
programs. In 2020, Congress recognized the need for expedited 
development and deployment of these technologies through the enactment 
of P.L. 116-260, which authorized approximately $6.7 billion over five 
years for carbon management RD&amp;D. These authorizations are in alignment 
with the recommendations of the CURC-EPRI Roadmap and will allow DOE to 
continue to make substantial progress in the development and 
commercialization of CCUS technologies for applications across sectors, 
including electric power.
     ccus &amp; power systems program fiscal year 2022 specific budget 
                            recommendations
    CURC recommends full funding of the authorization levels for Carbon 
Management activities included in P.L. 116-260. However, CURC has 
several overarching comments regarding FY 2022 funding for the CCUS and 
Power Systems Program:
    1. Any additional funding provided by Committee for new program 
activities should not come at the expense of existing initiatives, for 
which the Department has already made substantial progress to 
commercialize technologies.
    2. Funding for selected projects under the Coal FIRST Initiative 
should be provided to construct project facilities, as each project is 
intended to demonstrate technologies that will result in net-zero 
carbon electricity and hydrogen production and are in line with the 
objectives of this Administration.
    3. Continued funding should be directed to the Department to 
retrofit existing coal- and natural gas-fired electric power 
facilities, which will be critical to achieve the Administration&#x27;s 
electric sector decarbonization objectives.
    4. Substantial investment is needed to enable large-scale carbon 
storage, which underpins the entire value proposition of electric power 
and industrial sector carbon capture as well as negative emissions 
carbon capture technologies.
Carbon Capture Commercialization:
    CURC recommends $500M. CURC recommends funding for the Department 
to initiate a Carbon Capture Commercialization Program consistent with 
commercial demonstration objectives authorized in PL 116-260 and 
recommends that expanded funding for the Department be used to fund 
commercial-scale applications of carbon capture technologies for coal, 
natural gas, and industrial applications.
Carbon Capture:
    CURC recommends $205M. Consistent with the objectives of P.L. 116-
260, CURC&#x27;s recommendation includes funding to support research, 
development, large-scale pilot projects, and carbon capture test 
centers for a variety of transformational carbon capture technologies 
to improve the efficiency and lower the cost of carbon capture in both 
power and industrial sector applications. Funding for carbon capture 
should also be applied to new transformational technologies that are 
part of the DOE&#x27;s Advanced Energy Systems program (addressed below), as 
intended by the carbon capture program authorization in the Energy Act 
of 2020, as those technologies inherently include carbon capture as 
part of the overall process. CURC supports efforts to evaluate 
industrial carbon capture and negative emissions technologies, but not 
at the expense of critical existing R&amp;D for post- and pre-combustion 
capture technologies. CURC recommends full funding for the National 
Carbon Capture Center (NCCC), which is a critical path for testing and 
scaling up new technologies.
Front-End Engineering and Design:
    CURC recommends $50M for a front-end engineering and design (FEED) 
program on coal, natural gas, and industrial applications of carbon 
capture technologies, consistent with objectives authorized in P.L. 
116-260, which will provide technical and economic data necessary to 
accelerate CCUS project deployment. Funds within this appropriation 
should also be utilized to conduct FEED studies of carbon dioxide 
storage complexes that may be part of the carbon capture projects 
selected for a DOE award.
Carbon Storage:
    CURC recommends $200M. CURC supports the authorized funding levels 
for Carbon Storage activities included in P.L. 116-260. CURC notes that 
direct air capture and other negative emissions technologies will also 
be dependent on a robust carbon storage industry and recommends a more 
robust program as follows:
  --Storage Infrastructure: CURC--$180M.
    --Regional Initiatives: CURC--$30M to diversify the Regional 
            Initiatives&#x27; efforts, which were spun out of the Regional 
            Carbon Sequestration Partnerships (RCSPs). The Regional 
            Initiatives develop the geologic framework and 
            infrastructure necessary to validate and deploy carbon 
            storage, including the assessment of locations for 
            CarbonSAFE or other commercial-scale carbon storage 
            projects.
    --CarbonSAFE: CURC--$150M to fully fund CarbonSAFE Phase III 
            projects selected in fiscal year 2020 through to Phase IV 
            and, with remaining funds, solicit proposals for additional 
            CarbonSAFE projects. CarbonSAFE Phase III effort will seek 
            permits, continue to integrate efforts with regional 
            sources of CO2, demonstrate technical viability 
            of storage sites and support development of the 
            qualification processes necessary for a site to begin to 
            commercially accept CO2.
  --CCUS Storage R&amp;D: CURC--$20M. CURC recommends continued focus on 
        R&amp;D at all TRL levels to address technical gaps to improve 
        reliability of CCUS storage, including continued 
        characterization of potential storage opportunities, monitoring 
        and modeling technologies, risk assessment and mitigation tools 
        should be supported.
Carbon Utilization:
    CURC recommends $55.25M. CURC recommends funding for Carbon 
Utilization RD&amp;D activities consistent with P.L. 116-260.
Advanced Energy Systems:
    CURC recommends $273M. P.L. 116-260 includes authorizing language 
for R&amp;D and large-scale pilot projects for a variety of 
transformational carbon management technologies, including those 
covered by the Advanced Energy Systems program that inherently include 
carbon capture as part of their system process. CURC recommends funding 
for specific subprograms as follows:
  --Advanced Gasification Systems: $20M. CURC recommends continued 
        focus on research for low cost, modular gasification 
        technologies that will increase efficiency and lower capital 
        costs for coal and biomass to hydrogen or power applications, 
        as well as research to support a broad range of R&amp;D.
  --Advanced Turbines: $50M. CURC recommends funding to undertake R&amp;D 
        to improve the efficiency of gas turbines, to utilize 100% 
        hydrogen as well as hydrogen-natural gas blends as well as 
        ammonia and ammonia-hydrogen blends, and to test and validate 
        components and their performance as an integrated system.
  --Fuel Cells: $40M. CURC recommends funding for the development of 
        next generation fuel cell technologies to produce both power 
        and hydrogen from fossil fuels.
  --Advanced Combustion Systems: $68M. CURC recommends funding to 
        advance novel energy conversion technologies, including 
        chemical looping ($11M), pressurized oxycombustion ($29M), and 
        supercritical CO2 systems ($38M) for bench-scale work as well 
        as to advance promising technologies to pilot-scale testing.
Supercritical CO2 Technology (STEP):
    CURC recommends $20M. CURC recommends efforts, consistent with the 
original scope of work, to complete the necessary design and 
construction of the 10-MW pilot and to conduct the necessary testing 
for the facility. CURC also recommends funds for competitively awarded 
research and development activities, coordinated with the Offices of 
Nuclear Energy (NE) and Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE), 
to advance the use of supercritical power cycles.
Transformational Coal Pilot Plant Program:
    CURC recommends $10M, consistent with FY 2021 appropriations, to 
continue funding Phase III projects selected in FY 2021.
Cross Cutting R&amp;D Program:
    CURC recommends $75M. CURC&#x27;s recommendations for Cross Cutting R&amp;D 
include:
  --Sensors and Controls: $8M to improve monitoring of systems and 
        apply solutions to mitigate stress on fossil systems that 
        increasingly operate under cycling load conditions.
  --Extreme Environmental Materials: $16M. CURC recommends $8M to 
        support high temperature and pressure component testing under 
        real operating conditions, a project underway between DOE and 
        industry; and $8M for the A-USC Materials Consortium.
  --Water Management R&amp;D: $15M for thermoelectric applications of water 
        use and reuse, reduced water withdrawals, clean-up of water 
        discharge, and zero liquid discharge (ZLD) technologies.
  --Computational Science: $11M.
  --Advanced Energy Storage Initiative: $5M. CURC supports funding for 
        thermal, mechanical, and chemical storage systems that can be 
        integrated with fossil power systems.
  --University Training and Research: $4M to develop the next 
        generation workforce for the fossil energy generation industry 
        which is experiencing a very large generation gap.
Other Initiatives Within Fossil Energy Research and Development:
    Outside of the CCUS and Power Systems Program, CURC provides the 
following recommendations within the broader FE R&amp;D portfolio:
  --Natural Gas Utilization: $40M. CURC recommends the establishment of 
        a new research and development initiative within the Natural 
        Gas Technologies office to effectively utilize natural gas for 
        decarbonization solutions. Within those funds, CURC recommends 
        $40,000,000 for sustainable fuels and chemicals research and 
        development focused on conversion of natural gas, natural gas 
        liquids and other gas streams to low-carbon products, including 
        chemicals and fuels such as ammonia and low carbon hydrogen. 
        Comprehensive planning approaches for transitioning segments of 
        the economy to hydrogen and other low-carbon fuels should be a 
        part of the program, including analysis of the infrastructure 
        required to store and transport these fuels. CURC also supports 
        the establishment of a Center for Sustainable Fuels and 
        Chemicals at the National Energy Technology Lab and a funding 
        level of up to $15,000,000 for this initiative from within 
        available funds for sustainable fuels and chemicals research 
        and development.
  --Hydrogen RD&amp;D: $86M. CURC encourages the FE to expand hydrogen 
        research, development and demonstration activities that support 
        fossil fuel-derived hydrogen production equipped with CCUS 
        technologies that results in significantly reduced carbon 
        dioxide intensity. CURC encourages the Committee to recognize 
        the importance of low- and zero-carbon hydrogen production for 
        a variety of end uses and to support continued collaboration 
        with the EERE, OE, and NE.

    [This statement was submitted by Shannon Angielski, Executive 
Director, Carbon Utilization Research Council.]
                                 ______
                                 
 Prepared Statement of the Central Arizona Water Conservation District
    On behalf of the Central Arizona Water Conservation District 
(CAWCD), I encourage you to include an allocation of $10.7 million for 
the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s Salinity Control Basinwide Program for 
the Colorado River Basin in the Fiscal Year 2022 Energy and Water 
Development Appropriations bill. Continued funding for the Basinwide 
Program, which supports salinity control projects, will help protect 
the water quality of the Colorado River that is used by approximately 
40 million people for municipal and industrial purposes and used to 
irrigate approximately 4 million acres in the United States. CAWCD 
further supports continued prioritization of funding for the Drought 
Contingency Plan designed to reduce risks to the Colorado River basin 
from ongoing drought.
    CAWCD manages the Central Arizona Project, a multi-purpose water 
resource development and management project that delivers Colorado 
River water into central and southern Arizona. The largest supplier of 
renewable water in Arizona, CAP delivers an average of over 1.5 million 
acre-feet of Arizona&#x27;s 2.8 million acre-foot Colorado River entitlement 
each year to municipal and industrial users, agricultural irrigation 
districts, and Indian communities.
    Our goal at CAP is to provide an affordable, reliable and 
sustainable supply of Colorado River water to a service area that 
includes more than 80 percent of Arizona&#x27;s population. These renewable 
water supplies are critical to Arizona&#x27;s economy and to the economies 
of Native American communities throughout the state. Nearly 90% of 
economic activity in the State of Arizona occurs within CAP&#x27;s service 
area. The canal provides an economic benefit of $100 billion annually, 
accounting for one-third of the entire Arizona gross state product. CAP 
also helps the State of Arizona meet its water management and 
regulatory objectives of reducing groundwater use and ensuring 
availability of groundwater as a supplemental water supply during 
future droughts. Achieving and maintaining these water management 
objectives is critical to the long-term sustainability of a state as 
arid as Arizona.
  the colorado river basin salinity control program--its history and 
                              significance
    Recognizing the rapidly increasing salinity concentration in the 
Lower Colorado River and its impact on water users, Arizona joined with 
the other Colorado River Basin States in 1973 and organized the 
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum (Forum). In 1974, in 
coordination with the U.S. Department of the Interior and the U.S. 
State Department, the Forum worked with Congress in the passage of the 
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act (Act) to offset increased 
damages caused by continued development and use of the waters of the 
Colorado River. Title I of the Salinity Control Act deals with the 
United States&#x27; commitment to the quality of water being delivered to 
Mexico. Title II of the Act deals with improving the quality of the 
water delivered to the U.S. users.
    In the early years of the Program, Reclamation implemented salinity 
control through large projects that were funded with specific line item 
amounts. In 1995, Congress amended the Act and created Reclamation&#x27;s 
Basinwide Program. Under this program, Reclamation funds competitive 
proposals that will decrease the salt load to the Colorado River. Most 
of the received proposals target off-farm irrigation distribution 
systems such as canals and laterals. The lining or piping of canals and 
laterals prevents leakage into the groundwater and the dissolution and 
transportation of salts to the Colorado River and its tributaries. 
States provide a 30 percent cost share of the projects implemented by 
Reclamation. CAWCD and other key water providers in the United States 
and Mexico are working to maintain salinity standards.
                 negative impacts of concentrated salts
    Natural and man-induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates 
environmental and economic damages. The Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) has identified that more than 60 percent of the salt load of the 
Colorado River comes from natural sources. With the significant federal 
ownership in the Basin, most of this comes from federally administered 
lands. Human activity, principally irrigation, adds to the salt load of 
the Colorado River. Further, natural and human activities concentrate 
the dissolved salts in the River.
    The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) has estimated the 
current quantifiable damages of salt at about $454 million per year. 
Modeling by Reclamation indicates that quantifiable damages would 
increase to approximately $671 million annually by 2040 if the program 
were not to continue.
    These damages include: a reduction in the yield of salt sensitive 
crops and increased water use to meet the leaching requirements in the 
agricultural sector; increased use of imported water and cost of 
desalination and brine disposal for recycling water in the municipal 
sector; a reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe 
systems, water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers, 
and dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water softeners 
in the household sector; an increase in the cost of cooling operations 
and the cost of water softening, and a decrease in equipment service 
life in the commercial sector; an increase in the use of water and the 
cost of water treatment, and an increase in sewer fees in the 
industrial sector; a decrease in the life of treatment facilities and 
pipelines in the utility sector; and difficulty in meeting wastewater 
discharge requirements to comply with National Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System permit terms and conditions, and an increase in 
desalination and brine disposal costs due to accumulation of salts in 
groundwater basins.
     u.s. bureau of reclamation and drought contingency plan (dcp)
    Federal legislation was enacted in 2019 to authorize the 
implementation of the DCP at the federal level. The DCP was designed to 
protect the Colorado River system through reductions in use and 
increased incentives for storage in Lake Mead, the Lower Basin&#x27;s 
principal reservoir.
    The DCP agreements were developed through a collaborative process 
amongst the federal government, states, water users and Mexico. CAWCD 
encourages Congress to continue to prioritize support for the 
implementation of the DCP, including resources for the Bureau of 
Reclamation to achieve the goal to conserve up to 100,000 acre-feet per 
year as part of the DCP, and to continue to explore means to augment 
Colorado River system supplies consistent with the Colorado River Basin 
Project Act.
                               conclusion
    Implementation of salinity control practices through Reclamation&#x27;s 
Basinwide Program has proven to be a very cost-effective method of 
controlling the salinity of the Colorado River. In fact, the salt load 
of the Colorado River has now been reduced by roughly 1.2 million tons 
annually. However, shortfalls in recent Basinwide Program funding 
levels have led to inefficiencies in the implementation of the overall 
Program. The Plan of Implementation, as adopted by the states and 
approved by EPA, calls for 63,500 tons of additional salinity control 
measures to be implemented by Reclamation, the Bureau of Land 
Management and the USDA&#x27;s Natural Resources Conservation Services 
(NRCS) through 2021, or approximately 9,100 tons of new control each 
year by Reclamation.
    The current drought that has significantly impacted the West 
affects the amount of and quality of available water, which in turn has 
the potential to exacerbate the salinity concentration levels. As such, 
we respectfully request $10.7 million for the U.S. Bureau of 
Reclamation&#x27;s Basinwide Program for the Colorado River Basin in the 
Fiscal Year 2022 Appropriations bill. Continuation of adequate funding 
levels for salinity within this program will prevent further 
degradation of water quality of the Colorado River and significant 
increases of economic damages to its nearly 40 million municipal, 
industrial and irrigation users. In addition, we encourage Congress to 
continue to prioritize support for the implementation of the DCP.

    [This statement was submitted by Theodore C. Cooke, General 
Manager, Central Arizona Water Conservation District.]
                                 ______
                                 
       Prepared Statement of the Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition
              summary of clean hydrogen future coalition 
                    fiscal year 2022 recommendation
    CHFC (Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition) recommends $1,280,000,000 
for clean hydrogen research, development, and deployment (RD&amp;D) 
activities at the Department of Energy for FY 2022. These 
recommendations would direct $1,100,000,000 to clean hydrogen programs 
within the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) and 
$180,000,000 to clean hydrogen programs within the Office of Fossil 
Energy. However, CHFC stresses the importance of collaboration among 
the Offices of EERE, Fossil Energy, Nuclear Energy, and Science to 
effectively and efficiently utilize funds and ensure a comprehensive 
approach to clean hydrogen production, transport, and utilization.
Background on the Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition:
    The Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition (CHFC) is a diverse group of 
stakeholders supporting federal clean hydrogen policies that will 
stimulate the adoption of clean hydrogen in the U.S. and enable our 
country to achieve national decarbonization objectives while also 
increasing U.S. global competitiveness. CHFC members represent a broad 
spectrum of forward-thinking entities in industries that will play a 
critical role in the transition to a clean energy economy with a robust 
role for clean hydrogen.
Importance of Scaling Clean Hydrogen:
    With its ability to be used as a fuel source for transportation, as 
an industrial or chemical feedstock, or to produce and store 
electricity, clean hydrogen will have a critical role in accelerating 
decarbonization across all sectors of our economy. For example, clean 
hydrogen will be necessary to decarbonize heavier modes of transport--
including heavy-duty trucking, shipping, and aviation--that are 
substantially more difficult, if not impossible, to electrify than 
passenger vehicles. Clean hydrogen can also be substituted for fossil 
fuels to power certain high-temperature industrial processes that 
cannot be electrified and for which other mitigation options are 
limited or unavailable. In the electric power sector, clean hydrogen 
can be used to produce CO2 emissions-free electricity and can be used 
to enable the long-duration energy storage necessary to achieve the 
net-zero emission electric grid envisioned by the Biden administration.
    In order to create a clean hydrogen economy at the scale necessary 
to achieve national decarbonization objectives, the U.S. must take 
action to significantly reduce the cost of clean hydrogen production, 
propel its investment in clean hydrogen infrastructure, and incentivize 
its use in various end-use market applications. Scaling clean hydrogen 
will also provide an opportunity to transition existing--and create 
new--skilled, high wage jobs needed to support the clean energy 
transition.
Importance of Federal Support for RD&amp;D:
    Given the level of clean hydrogen production, infrastructure, and 
end-use demand that must be in place to power a clean hydrogen economy 
at scale, a comprehensive and coordinated federal investment strategy 
is required from the Department of Energy. The Department of Energy has 
demonstrated commercialization successes across its applied energy 
research offices and federal support has long played a critical role in 
commercializing energy technologies and making them economically viable 
for the private sector. There are typically long lead times for 
advancing energy technologies from concept to demonstration, then to 
commercialization, and each phase carries significant technical and 
cost risks as well as uncertainty in market requirements and timing. To 
accelerate the energy transition, robust federal support is necessary 
to scale up clean hydrogen technologies through each of these stages, 
particularly if they are to be made available in a sufficient period of 
time to contribute to domestic decarbonization objectives.
  fiscal year 2022 specific budget recommendations--office of energy 
                    efficiency and renewable energy
    The CHFC recommends $1.1 billion for clean hydrogen RD&amp;D activities 
within the EERE. While EERE has traditionally housed the majority of 
federal RD&amp;D programs related to hydrogen, CHFC encourages the 
Committee to provide direction to DOE requiring cross-Department 
collaboration on hydrogen RD&amp;D activities.
Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies:
    CHFC recommends $800 million. The CHFC recommends funding as 
follows:
  --H2@Scale Commercial Demonstration: CHFC recommends $500 million for 
        the initiation of a commercialization program for technologies 
        that have the potential to produce, transport, or utilize 
        hydrogen with low-, net-zero, or net-negative carbon dioxide 
        emissions. There are a number of clean hydrogen production 
        technologies for which funding should support, including hybrid 
        hydrogen production integrated with clean electricity 
        generation, autothermal reforming, compact hydrogen generators, 
        biomass combustion to hydrogen, and solid waste and plastics to 
        hydrogen. The CHFC encourages the Committee to recommend that 
        DOE utilize clean hydrogen produced from one commercial 
        demonstration facility for the purposes of supplying hydrogen 
        for medium- and heavy-duty hydrogen fuel cell vehicles and the 
        associated fueling infrastructure to demonstrate the 
        integration of clean hydrogen production with specific end use 
        applications. The CHFC recommends that these activities be 
        conducted in coordination with the Office of Fossil Energy.
  --H2@Scale Front-End Engineering and Design: CHFC recommends $150 
        million for a front-end engineering and design (FEED) program 
        for technologies that have the potential to produce, transport, 
        or utilize hydrogen with low-, net-zero, or net-negative carbon 
        dioxide emissions. The CHFC recommends that these activities be 
        conducted in coordination with the Office of Fossil Energy.
  --Research, Development, and Demonstration: CHFC recommends $150 
        million to expand clean hydrogen research, development and 
        demonstration activities based on the priorities described in 
        the Department of Energy&#x27;s 2020 ``Hydrogen Program Plan&#x27;&#x27; and 
        work in coordination with the Offices of Fossil and Nuclear 
        Energy to advance the priorities outlined in the strategy. 
        Within available funds, CHFC recommends continued research on 
        novel onboard hydrogen tank systems, trailer delivery systems 
        to reduce cost of delivered hydrogen, novel chemical hydrogen 
        carriers, and development of material-based storage and 
        hydrogen storage materials. CHFC also recommends continued 
        electrolyzer development, including high-temperature 
        electrolyzer RD&amp;D activities, cost-shared with the office of 
        Nuclear Energy, with a focus on improving the efficiency and 
        reducing costs of electrolyzers. CHFC recommends continued fuel 
        cell technology development for the transportation fleet, 
        including for long haul and heavy-duty trucking. The CHFC 
        encourages the Department to consult regularly with industry to 
        avoid duplication of private-sector activities and to work with 
        the Department of Transportation and industry on coordinating 
        efforts to deploy hydrogen fueling infrastructure.
    SuperTruck III Program: CHFC recommends $300 million for continued 
funding of the SuperTruck III program to improve the energy and freight 
efficiency of heavy- and medium-duty long- and regional-haul vehicles. 
Within this funding, CHFC recommends demonstration of hydrogen fuel 
cell technologies capable of meeting cost, efficiency, and performance 
targets identified by the Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office 
for hydrogen-fueled long-haul Class 8 trucks.
  fiscal year 2022 specific budget recommendations--office of fossil 
                                 energy
    The CHFC recommends $180 million for the Office of Fossil Energy to 
undertake hydrogen-related RD&amp;D activities within the Fossil Energy 
Research and Development (FE R&amp;D) Program. The FE R&amp;D Program can 
leverage existing expertise to further develop clean hydrogen 
production from fossil fuels coupled with carbon capture, utilization, 
and storage (CCUS) with low- and net-zero CO2 emissions, or net-
negative emissions when fossil fuels are co-fired with sustainable 
biomass resources. The Office of Fossil Energy is also home to existing 
expertise within the Department on hydrogen transport via pipeline and 
the use of clean hydrogen in industrial and power applications.
Natural Gas Technologies:
    The CHFC recommends $90 million for the Natural Gas Technologies 
Program as follows:
  --Clean Hydrogen RD&amp;D: CHFC recommends $40 million to establish a new 
        research and development initiative within the Natural Gas 
        Technologies Office to decarbonize the use of natural gas to 
        produce clean fuels, including low- or zero-carbon hydrogen and 
        other low carbon fuels or feedstocks such as ammonia. 
        Comprehensive planning approaches for transitioning segments of 
        the economy to hydrogen and other low-carbon fuels should be a 
        part of the program, including analysis of the infrastructure 
        required to store and transport these fuels.
  --Natural Gas Infrastructure: CHFC recommends $50 million. The CHFC 
        recognizes the importance of leveraging our existing 
        infrastructure and its potential for transporting clean 
        hydrogen. Hydrogen blending in natural gas pipelines is being 
        studied, and there is a need for additional research to 
        understand the impacts to existing infrastructure. Within this 
        funding, the CHFC recommends not less than $10 million to 
        conduct research and development for hydrogen transportation 
        and storage infrastructure, which should address the safety, 
        mechanical integrity, and regulatory impacts of blending 
        hydrogen into existing natural gas pipelines and assess whether 
        those blends can be utilized throughout the distribution 
        system. Pipeline research should also focus on novel, low-cost 
        materials for use in pipelines to assess compatibility of 
        higher-strength steels with hydrogen and first-of-a-kind 
        demonstrations of novel pipeline technologies. Storage research 
        should focus on geologic storage of hydrogen. Comprehensive 
        planning approaches for transitioning segments of natural gas 
        users to increased hydrogen use should be part of the program, 
        including analysis of the infrastructure required to store and 
        transport hydrogen
CCUS and Power Systems:
    CHFC recommends $90 million for hydrogen-related RD&amp;D activities 
within the CCUS and Power Systems Program as follows:
  --Advanced Turbines R&amp;D: Within available funds for Advanced Energy 
        Systems, CHFC recommends $50 million for Advanced Turbines R&amp;D, 
        with direction to use funds for a research and development 
        program focused on utilizing clean hydrogen, clean hydrogen-
        natural gas blends, and ammonia and ammonia-hydrogen blends, to 
        test and validate components and their performance as an 
        integrated system, working cooperatively with industry, 
        universities, and other appropriate parties. Funding should 
        also support demonstrating hydrogen turbines that can be fueled 
        with pure hydrogen.
  --Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: Within available funds for Advanced Energy 
        Systems, CHFC recommends $40 million for the development of 
        next generation solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) technologies to 
        produce power and hydrogen from fossil fuels. This activity 
        builds on significant progress made through research and 
        development in this program to enable efficient, cost-effective 
        electricity generation and hydrogen production with minimal use 
        of water. These activities will result in development of SOFC 
        technologies to produce hydrogen from fossil fuels while 
        benefiting from synergies with EERE&#x27;s Hydrogen and Fuel Cell 
        Technologies Program relative to infrastructure developments 
        and safety of end use. This funding will preserve U.S. 
        leadership in SOFC technology, ensure utilization of extensive 
        fossil fuel resources in the U.S., and will result in ultra-
        high efficiency production of power and hydrogen.

    [This statement was submitted by Shannon Angielski, President, 
Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition.]
                                 ______
                                 
 Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum
    Waters from the Colorado River are used by approximately 40 million 
people for municipal and industrial purposes and used to irrigate 
approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States. Natural and man-
induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates environmental and 
economic damages. In 2020 the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) 
estimated the quantifiable damages to Lower Basin water users due to 
elevated salinity levels at about $354 million per year. Congress 
authorized the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program (Program) 
through the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act (Act) (P.L. 93-
320) in 1974 to offset increased damages caused by continued 
development and use of the waters of the Colorado River. Modeling by 
Reclamation indicates that the quantifiable damages will rise to 
approximately $671 million annually by the year 2040 without 
continuation of the Program. Congress has directed the Secretary of the 
Interior to implement a comprehensive program for minimizing salt 
contributions to the Colorado River. Reclamation serves as the lead 
federal agency in implementing the Program. Reclamation primarily 
institutes salinity control through its Basinwide Program. A funding 
level of $10.7 million is required in 2022 to prevent further 
degradation of the quality of the Colorado River and a commensurate 
increase in downstream economic damages to water users.
    EPA has identified that more than 60 percent of the salt load of 
the Colorado River comes from natural sources. The majority of land 
within the Colorado River Basin is federally owned, much of which is 
administered by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). In authorizing the 
Program, Congress recognized that most of the salts in the Colorado 
River originate from federally owned lands. Title I of the Act deals 
with programs downstream of Imperial Dam that enable the U.S. to meet 
its commitment regarding the quality of waters being delivered to 
Mexico (Minute No. 242 of the International Boundary and Water 
Commission, United States and Mexico). Title II of the Act addresses 
measures upstream from Imperial Dam, thus improving the quality of the 
water delivered to users in the United States. This testimony deals 
specifically with Title II efforts.
    In the early years of the Program, Reclamation implemented salinity 
control through large projects, which were funded with specific line-
item amounts. In 1995, Congress amended the Act and created 
Reclamation&#x27;s Basinwide Program. Under this program, Reclamation funds 
competitive proposals for projects which will decrease the salt load to 
the Colorado River. Most of the received proposals target off-farm 
irrigation distribution systems such as canals and laterals. The lining 
or piping of canals and laterals prevents leakage of water into the 
groundwater system and the dissolution and transportation of salts to 
the Colorado River and its tributaries. It is more efficient and cost 
effective for Reclamation to perform the off-farm distribution system 
improvements prior to NRCS treating the on-farm acres with salinity 
control practices (i.e., Reclamation should pipe a canal or lateral 
prior to the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) putting a 
pressurized sprinkler system on farm). Shortfalls in recent Basinwide 
Program funding levels have led to inefficiencies in the implementation 
of the overall Program. The funding amount identified above is required 
to get the Basinwide Program back on pace with the overall Program 
implementation needs.
    Concentration of salt in the Colorado River causes approximately 
$354 million annually in quantified damages and significantly more in 
unquantified damages in the United States and results in poor water 
quality for United States users. Damages, by water usage sector, 
include the following:
  --a reduction in the ability to reclaim and reuse water for 
        beneficial uses, including drinking water and irrigation water 
        supplies, due to high salinities in the water delivered to 
        water treatment and reclamation facilities,
  --a reduction in the yield of salt sensitive crops, increased water 
        use to meet leaching requirements and additional actions 
        necessary to comply with the Clean Water Act within the 
        agricultural sector,
  --increased use of imported water and cost of desalination and brine 
        disposal for recycling water in the municipal sector,
  --a reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems, 
        water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers and 
        dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water 
        softeners in the household sector,
  --an increase in the cost of cooling operations and the cost of water 
        softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the 
        commercial sector,
  --an increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment, 
        and a corresponding increase in sewer fees in the industrial 
        sector,
  --a decrease in the lifespan of treatment facilities and pipelines in 
        the utility sector, and
  --difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply 
        with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit 
        terms and conditions, and an increase in desalination and brine 
        disposal costs necessary to minimize accumulation of salts in 
        groundwater basins.
    The Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum (Forum) is composed 
of gubernatorial appointees from Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, 
New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming. The Forum is charged with reviewing the 
Colorado River&#x27;s water quality standards for salinity every three years 
to facilitate compliance with Section 303(c) of the Clean Water Act 
(P.L. 92-500). In so doing, it adopts a Plan of Implementation 
consistent with these standards. The level of appropriation requested 
in this testimony is in keeping with the adopted Plan of 
Implementation. If adequate funds are not appropriated, significant 
damages from higher salinity concentrations in the water will be more 
widespread in the United States and Mexico.
    In summary, implementation of salinity control practices through 
Reclamation&#x27;s Basinwide Program has proven to be a very cost-effective 
method of controlling the salinity of the Colorado River and is an 
essential component to the overall Program. Adequate funding levels for 
salinity control within this Program will prevent the water quality of 
the Colorado River from further degradation and significant increases 
in economic damages to municipal, industrial and irrigation users. A 
modest investment in source control pays huge dividends in improved 
water quality for nearly 40 million Americans.

    [This statement was submitted by Don A. Barnett, Executive 
Director, Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum.]
                                 ______
                                 
Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program
                                summary
    This Statement is submitted in support of Fiscal Year 2022 
appropriations for the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program 
(Program) of the Department of the Interior&#x27;s Bureau of Reclamation 
(Reclamation). Reclamation serves as the lead federal agency in 
implementing the Program. Reclamation primarily institutes salinity 
control through its Basinwide Program. A total of $10,700,000 is 
requested for Fiscal Year 2022 to implement the authorized salinity 
control program of the Bureau of Reclamation. An appropriation of 
$10,700,000 for Reclamation&#x27;s salinity control program is needed to 
protect water quality standards for salinity and to prevent unnecessary 
levels of economic damage from increased salinity in water delivered to 
the Lower Basin States of the Colorado River.
                               statement
    The water quality standards for salinity of the Colorado River must 
be protected while the Basin States continue to develop their compact 
apportioned waters of the river. The salinity standards for the 
Colorado River have been adopted by the seven Basin States and approved 
by the Environmental Protection Agency. While currently the standards 
have not been exceeded, salinity control projects must be brought on-
line in a timely manner to counter the effects of future development 
that could result in unnecessary damages from higher levels of salinity 
in the water delivered to the Lower Basin States of the Colorado River.
    The seven Colorado River Basin States, in response to the Clean 
Water Act of 1972, formed the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control 
Forum (Forum), a body comprised of gubernatorial representatives from 
the seven states. The Forum was created to provide for interstate 
cooperation in response to the Clean Water Act and to provide the 
states with information necessary to comply with Sections 303(a) and 
(b) of the Act. The Forum has become the primary means for the Basin 
States to coordinate with federal agencies and Congress to support the 
implementation of the salinity control program for the Colorado River 
Basin.
    The Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act was authorized by 
Congress and signed into law in 1974. This authorized the Secretary of 
the Interior to initiate the Program, and it created the Colorado River 
Basin Salinity Control Advisory Council representing the seven Basin 
States. This federal advisory committee works closely with the Forum.
    Colorado River water is used by approximately 40 million people and 
irrigates approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States. Bureau 
of Reclamation studies show that quantified damages from Colorado River 
salinity to United States water users are about $354 million per year. 
Unquantified damages are greater. Reclamation&#x27;s modeling indicates that 
the quantifiable damages would increase to $671 million per year by 
2040 if the Program is not continued. Control of salinity is necessary 
for the states of the Colorado River Basin, including New Mexico, to 
continue to develop their compact-apportioned waters of the Colorado 
River.
    Timely appropriations for the funding of the salinity control 
program are essential to comply with the water quality standards for 
salinity, prevent unnecessary economic damages in the United States, 
and protect the quality of the water that the United States is 
obligated to deliver to Mexico. The Basin States and federal agencies 
agree that increases in the salinity of the Colorado River will result 
in significant increases in damages to water users in the Lower 
Colorado River Basin. Continued strong support and adequate funding of 
the salinity control program is required to control salinity-related 
damages in the United States and Mexico.
    Congress amended the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act in 
July 1995 (Public Law 104-20), creating Reclamation&#x27;s Basinwide 
Program. The Basinwide Program has proven to be cost-effective, and the 
Basin States provide up-front cost-sharing. Proposals from public and 
private sector entities in response to Reclamation&#x27;s requests for 
proposals and funding opportunity announcements have exceeded available 
funding appropriated in recent years. The Basin States&#x27; cost-sharing 
adds 43 cents for each federal dollar appropriated.
    Public Law 106-459 gave the Bureau of Reclamation additional 
spending authority for the salinity control program. With the 
additional authority in place and cost-sharing available from the Basin 
States, it is important that the salinity control program be funded at 
the level requested by the Forum and Basin States to protect the water 
quality of the Colorado River. Some of the most cost-effective salinity 
control opportunities occur when Reclamation improves irrigation 
delivery systems concurrently with on-farm irrigation improvements 
undertaken by the U.S. Department of Agriculture&#x27;s Environmental 
Quality Incentives Program (EQIP). The Basin States cost-share funding 
is available for both on-farm and off-farm improvements. The EQIP 
funding appears to be adequate to accomplish the on-farm work. Adequate 
funding for Reclamation&#x27;s off-farm work is needed to maintain timely 
implementation and effectiveness of salinity control measures.
    I urge Congress to appropriate $10.7 million to the Basinwide 
Program of the Bureau of Reclamation for the Colorado River Basin 
Salinity Control Program. This investment in water quality will pay for 
itself many times over. Also, I fully support testimony by the Forum&#x27;s 
Executive Director, Don Barnett, in request of this appropriation.

    [This statement was submitted by Rolf Schmidt-Petersen, Director, 
New Mexico Interstate Stream Commission.]
                                 ______
                                 
Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program
                                summary
    This Statement is submitted in support of Fiscal Year 2022 
appropriations for the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program 
(Program) of the Department of the Interior&#x27;s Bureau of Reclamation 
(Reclamation). Reclamation serves as the lead federal agency in 
implementing the Program. Reclamation primarily institutes salinity 
control through its Basinwide Program. A total of $10,700,000 is 
requested for Fiscal Year 2022 to implement the authorized salinity 
control program of the Bureau of Reclamation. An appropriation of 
$10,700,000 for Reclamation&#x27;s salinity control program is needed to 
protect water quality standards for salinity and to prevent unnecessary 
levels of economic damage from increased salinity in water delivered to 
the Lower Basin States of the Colorado River.
                               statement
    The water quality standards for salinity of the Colorado River must 
be protected while the Basin States continue to develop their compact 
apportioned waters of the river. The salinity standards for the 
Colorado River have been adopted by the seven Basin States and approved 
by the Environmental Protection Agency. While currently the standards 
have not been exceeded, salinity control projects must be brought on-
line in a timely manner to counter the effects of future development 
that could result in unnecessary damages from higher levels of salinity 
in the water delivered to the Lower Basin States of the Colorado River.
    The seven Colorado River Basin States, in response to the Clean 
Water Act of 1972, formed the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control 
Forum (Forum), a body comprised of gubernatorial representatives from 
the seven states. The Forum was created to provide for interstate 
cooperation in response to the Clean Water Act and to provide the 
states with information necessary to comply with Sections 303(a) and 
(b) of the Act. The Forum has become the primary means for the Basin 
States to coordinate with federal agencies and Congress to support the 
implementation of the salinity control program for the Colorado River 
Basin.
    The Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act was authorized by 
Congress and signed into law in 1974. This authorized the Secretary of 
the Interior to initiate the Program, and it created the Colorado River 
Basin Salinity Control Advisory Council representing the seven Basin 
States. This federal advisory committee works closely with the Forum.
    Colorado River water is used by approximately 40 million people and 
irrigates approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States. Bureau 
of Reclamation studies show that quantified damages from Colorado River 
salinity to United States water users are about $354 million per year. 
Unquantified damages are greater. Reclamation&#x27;s modeling indicates that 
the quantifiable damages would increase to $671 million per year by 
2040 if the Program is not continued. Control of salinity is necessary 
for the states of the Colorado River Basin, including New Mexico, to 
continue to develop their compact-apportioned waters of the Colorado 
River.
    Timely appropriations for the funding of the salinity control 
program are essential to comply with the water quality standards for 
salinity, prevent unnecessary economic damages in the United States, 
and protect the quality of the water that the United States is 
obligated to deliver to Mexico. The Basin States and federal agencies 
agree that increases in the salinity of the Colorado River will result 
in significant increases in damages to water users in the Lower 
Colorado River Basin. Continued strong support and adequate funding of 
the salinity control program is required to control salinity-related 
damages in the United States and Mexico.
    Congress amended the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act in 
July 1995 (Public Law 104-20), creating Reclamation&#x27;s Basinwide 
Program. The Basinwide Program has proven to be cost-effective, and the 
Basin States provide up-front cost-sharing. Proposals from public and 
private sector entities in response to Reclamation&#x27;s requests for 
proposals and funding opportunity announcements have exceeded available 
funding appropriated in recent years. The Basin States&#x27; cost-sharing 
adds 43 cents for each federal dollar appropriated.
    Public Law 106-459 gave the Bureau of Reclamation additional 
spending authority for the salinity control program. With the 
additional authority in place and cost-sharing available from the Basin 
States, it is important that the salinity control program be funded at 
the level requested by the Forum and Basin States to protect the water 
quality of the Colorado River. Some of the most cost-effective salinity 
control opportunities occur when Reclamation improves irrigation 
delivery systems concurrently with on-farm irrigation improvements 
undertaken by the U.S. Department of Agriculture&#x27;s Environmental 
Quality Incentives Program (EQIP). The Basin States cost-share funding 
is available for both on-farm and off-farm improvements. The EQIP 
funding appears to be adequate to accomplish the on-farm work. Adequate 
funding for Reclamation&#x27;s off-farm work is needed to maintain timely 
implementation and effectiveness of salinity control measures.
    I urge Congress to appropriate $10.7 million to the Basinwide 
Program of the Bureau of Reclamation for the Colorado River Basin 
Salinity Control Program. This investment in water quality will pay for 
itself many times over. Also, I fully support testimony by the Forum&#x27;s 
Executive Director, Don Barnett, in request of this appropriation.

    [This statement was submitted by Rolf Schmidt-Petersen, Director, 
New Mexico Interstate Stream Commission.]
                                 ______
                                 
      Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Board of California
    This testimony is in support of Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 funding for 
the Department of the Interior for Title II Colorado River Basin 
Salinity Control Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-320), as amended. In the Act, 
Congress designated the Department of the Interior, Bureau of 
Reclamation (Reclamation) to be the lead agency for salinity control in 
the Colorado River Basin. Reclamation primarily implements salinity 
control through its Basinwide Program, established by Congress through 
an amendment to the Act in 1995. Funding levels for the Basinwide 
Program have fallen behind in recent years, and a funding level of 
$10.7 million is requested to be provided in FY-2022 to prevent further 
degradation of the quality of Colorado River water supplies and 
increased economic damages.
    The Colorado River System is used by approximately 40 million 
people for municipal and industrial purposes and used to irrigate 
approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States, and supplies 
municipal and agricultural uses in Mexico. Within Southern California, 
the Colorado River serves close to 20 million residents and 860,000 
acres of irrigated agriculture, including municipal, industrial, and 
agricultural water users in Imperial, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, 
San Bernardino, San Diego, and Ventura Counties. Natural and human-
induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates environmental and 
economic damages. In 2020 Reclamation estimated the quantifiable 
economic damages from salt in the Colorado River at about $354 million 
per year. Modeling by Reclamation indicates that these economic damages 
could rise to nearly $671 million annually by the year 2040 without 
continued implementation of the Basinwide Program.
    The Colorado River Board of California is the state agency charged 
with protecting California&#x27;s interests and rights in the water and 
power resources of the Colorado River system. In this capacity, 
California participates along with the other six Colorado River Basin 
states in the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum (Forum), the 
interstate organization responsible for coordinating the Basin States&#x27; 
salinity control efforts. In close cooperation with the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and pursuant to requirements of 
the Clean Water Act, the Forum is charged with reviewing the Colorado 
River&#x27;s water quality standards every three years. Every three years 
the Forum also adopts a Plan of Implementation consistent with these 
water quality standards. The level of appropriation being supported by 
this testimony is consistent with the Forum&#x27;s 2020 Plan of 
Implementation for continued salinity control efforts within the 
Colorado River Basin. The Forum&#x27;s 2020 Plan of Implementation can be 
found on this website: https://coloradoriversalinity.org/docs/
2020%20REVIEW%20-%20Final%20w%20appendices.
pdf.
    If adequate funds are not appropriated to Reclamation&#x27;s Basinwide 
Program, significant environmental and economic damages associated with 
increasing salinity concentrations in Colorado River water will become 
more widespread in the United States and Mexican portions of the 
Colorado River Basin. For example, damages occur from:
  --A reduction in the ability and increased costs to reclaim and reuse 
        water for consumptive beneficial use, including drinking water 
        supply and irrigation, due to high salinities in the water 
        delivered to water treatment and reclamation facilities;
  --A reduction in the yield of salt-sensitive crops, increased water 
        use to meet the leaching requirements to maintain crop 
        productivity, and additional actions necessary to comply with 
        the Clean Water Act in the agricultural sector;
  --Increased use of imported water and increased cost of desalination 
        and brine disposal for recycling water in the municipal sector;
  --A reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems, 
        water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers and 
        dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water 
        softeners in the residential sector;
  --An increase in the cost of cooling operations and the cost of water 
        softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the 
        commercial sector;
  --An increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment, 
        and a corresponding increase in sewer fees in the industrial 
        sector;
  --A decrease in the lifespan of treatment facilities and pipelines in 
        the utility sector; and
  --Difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply 
        with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit 
        terms and conditions, and an increase in desalination and brine 
        disposal costs necessary to minimize accumulation of salts in 
        groundwater basins.
    The 2020 Plan of Implementation, as adopted by the Basin States and 
approved by EPA, calls for 62,400 tons annually of additional salinity 
control measures to be implemented by Reclamation, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, and Bureau of Land Management by 2024. Over the 
past years, the Basinwide Program has proven to be a very cost-
effective approach to help mitigate the impacts of increased salinity 
in the Colorado River. Adequate federal funding of this important 
program is essential. Based on current program cost levels, 
Reclamation&#x27;s funding for the Basinwide Program must be at least $10.7 
million to meet those annual salinity control targets.
    The Colorado River is, and will continue to be, a major and vital 
water resource to the nearly 20 million residents of southern 
California, including municipal, industrial, and agricultural water 
users in Imperial, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San 
Diego, and Ventura Counties. The protection and improvement of Colorado 
River water quality through an effective salinity control program 
avoids additional economic and environmental damages to California, the 
other Colorado River Basin states and Mexico that rely on Colorado 
River water resources.
    Thank you for your consideration of this testimony.

    [This statement was submitted by Christopher S. Harris, Executive 
Director, 
Colorado River Board of California.]
                                 ______
                                 
            Prepared Statement of Colorado Springs Utilities
    Dear Chairman Feinstein and Senator Kennedy:
    I am writing to you on behalf of Colorado Springs Utilities to 
request your support for appropriations included in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region for the Colorado River Compliance Activities and 
Endangered Species Programs.
    Colorado Springs Utilities is the largest community-owned, not-for-
profit, four-service utility in the nation. We provide water, 
wastewater, gas, and electric utility services to approximately 500,000 
residents in the Pikes Peak Region of Colorado. The successful 
continuation of the Colorado River Compliance Activities and Endangered 
Species Programs are of great importance to Colorado Springs Utilities 
and our community. These collaborative programs are critical to 
improving, conserving, and recovering endangered fish species, while 
maintaining water use and development, ESA compliance, and federal 
project authorized purposes.
    The President&#x27;s recommended budget included the following items and 
amounts:
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Programs 
provide $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities needed 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River Endangered 
        Fish Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance 
        stream flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conserve genetic integrity through hatcheries and stocking 
        efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and research and 
        monitoring to provide the scientific basis to guide decision 
        making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, and agricultural uses.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Bureau of Reclamation project upstream of 
Lake Powell.
    We appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continued financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Earl Wilkinson III, Chief Water 
Compliance 
Innovation Officer, Colorado Springs Utilities.]
                                 ______
                                 
            Prepared Statement of Colorado Springs Utilities
    Dear Chairman Feinstein and Senator Kennedy:
    I am writing to you on behalf of Colorado Springs Utilities to 
request your support for appropriations included in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region for the Colorado River Compliance Activities and 
Endangered Species Programs.
    Colorado Springs Utilities is the largest community-owned, not-for-
profit, four-service utility in the nation. We provide water, 
wastewater, gas, and electric utility services to approximately 500,000 
residents in the Pikes Peak Region of Colorado. The successful 
continuation of the Colorado River Compliance Activities and Endangered 
Species Programs are of great importance to Colorado Springs Utilities 
and our community. These collaborative programs are critical to 
improving, conserving, and recovering endangered fish species, while 
maintaining water use and development, ESA compliance, and federal 
project authorized purposes.
    The President&#x27;s recommended budget included the following items and 
amounts:
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Programs 
provide $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities needed 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River Endangered 
        Fish Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance 
        stream flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conserve genetic integrity through hatcheries and stocking 
        efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and research and 
        monitoring to provide the scientific basis to guide decision 
        making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, and agricultural uses.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Bureau of Reclamation project upstream of 
Lake Powell.
    We appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continued financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Earl Wilkinson III, Chief Water 
Compliance 
Innovation Officer, Colorado Springs Utilities.]
                                 ______
                                 
           Prepared Statement of the Colorado Water Congress
    I am requesting your support for appropriations in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery 
Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation Program. 
The budget items and amounts requested in the President&#x27;s budget for 
these programs are described below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    I appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Doug Kemper, Executive Director, 
Colorado Water Congress.]
                                 ______
                                 
      Prepared Statement of the Columbia Basin Development League
    Chairman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, members of the 
Subcommittee, thank you for giving the Columbia Basin Development 
League (League) the opportunity to submit testimony on the Bureau of 
Reclamation&#x27;s budget for fiscal year 2022. This testimony is submitted 
on behalf of the League, its members, and stakeholders. The League is 
made up of farmers, businesses, civic and economic groups, and 
individuals that recognize the importance of completing the Bureau of 
Reclamation&#x27;s Columbia Basin Project (CBP). The CBP is the largest 
Reclamation project in the U.S. and generates over $5.81 billion in 
annual, cumulative economic activity. The League was organized in the 
early 1960&#x27;s to support the CBP so as to ensure delivery of essential 
water supplies to highly productive agricultural land in Washington 
State.
    The League&#x27;s long-term goal is full development of the CBP; but 
today it remains about 3/4 developed. And while the CBP is an existing 
line item in the Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s budget, we request an increase 
to that line item with funding dedicated to a critical economic and 
environmental issue: the decline of the Odessa Aquifer. The Odessa 
Aquifer is on the eastern-most side of the CBP in a region authorized 
to receive water. The State of Washington issued ground water permits 
in the 1960&#x27;s and 1970&#x27;s so agricultural and economic development could 
begin in the area while local communities waited for the federal 
government to build out the CBP. As already mentioned, the CBP is 3/4 
completed. While communities and farmers waited, ground water levels 
severe declined in the Odessa region.
    Saving the Odessa Aquifer would keep and create jobs in both the 
near and long term, maintain agricultural production, improve food 
security, protect and bolster economic vitality of Eastern Washington&#x27;s 
communities, and fulfill a federal commitment--decades in the making--
by providing access to the critical resource of water.
    Since 1980, ground water levels in the Odessa area have dropped 
approximately 200 feet. In some cases, ground water must be pumped from 
wells as deep as 2,400 feet. Pumping water from this depth is costly 
and water found at this depth is of poor quality: high sodium 
concentrations, and often requiring treatment before use. Numerous 
farmers, and increasingly, municipalities drawing from the same aquifer 
have wells that are no longer productive, or produce water of such poor 
quality that is not useable. As the aquifer continues to decline, well 
failures increase.
    Many parts of the United States are dealing with declining aquifers 
and share the economic consequences. However, the ground water supplies 
in the Odessa, unlike many other areas, can be replaced with a 
sustainable supply of surface water. The water and associated water 
rights are available and already secured. However, the water delivery 
infrastructure necessary to secure the entire region&#x27;s economic 
vitality needs to be completed.
    To solve this issue, the Odessa Ground Water Replacement Project 
(OGWRP) was established as the preferred alternative in the 2012 Odessa 
Subarea Special Study Final Environmental Impact Statement. OGWRP seeks 
to supply surface water from the CBP to irrigate land currently using 
ground water (as planned by the Bureau of Reclamation for build-out of 
the CBP). In addition to other dedicated CBP funding, the OGWRP 
received $1.28 million in formulated funding and $222,000 in additional 
capacity in FY2021. The President&#x27;s FY2022 budget request includes 
$27,985,000 for the CBP. A portion of these funds would be used for a 
variety of programs, including the phased development of the OGWRP.
    We respectfully request Congress invest an additional $18,525,000 
specifically for the OGWRP in FY2022.
    The OGWRP is an environmental and regional economy rescue program. 
Ground water supplies conserved, as a result of OGWRP, will be reserved 
for domestic and municipal uses while preserving highly productive 
irrigated lands that drive thousands of jobs in the region. The program 
has completed all required environmental, water rights and Endangered 
Species Act reviews and is already in phased construction. A series of 
pumping plant and pipeline systems are being built along East Low Canal 
to serve land now irrigated from deep wells. The first system to be 
constructed at East Low (EL) canal mile 47.5 began operating this 
irrigation season. Three more systems are in the design phase. Our 
request of this subcommittee is for the necessary funding to complete 
those designs and begin design on additional systems required to 
implement Reclamation&#x27;s preferred alternative for the program, which 
has a positive benefit/cost ration allowing Reclamation investment. Our 
request also includes $1,676,000 to automate East Low Canal (ELC) 
gravity head gates to adjust for fluctuations resulting from conveyance 
of new pump plant diversions. The automated gates will create 
consistent lateral flows regardless of canal fluctuations, reducing 
waste and labor and resulting in water conservation and safe 
operations.
    The State of Washington and local land owners recognize the vital 
importance of finding a sustainable water supply. Since 2005, the state 
has contributed over $125 million in funding for projects to supply 
water to the Odessa region. This includes construction of major 
infrastructure components (including structures like siphons) which 
become the property of the federal government upon completion. Local 
landowners also invest in this project through the repayment of 
municipal bonds secured by the East Columbia Basin Irrigation District. 
These are significant investments in federally-owned projects.
    Funding for OGWRP presents an excellent opportunity for federal 
investment in an innovative infrastructure project for rural and 
underserved communities. Additional funding will specifically help 
complete expansion of the East Low Canal and build out the pump and 
pipeline infrastructure necessary for surface water deliver to farmers. 
These are shovel ready projects that are vital for the continued 
development of the CBP as well as the preservation of groundwater for 
multiple municipalities across the region. Details for the various 
components are provided below. Without OGWRP, the aquifer will continue 
to decline at an unsustainable rate and both agricultural water 
supplies and the domestic water supply of many underserved communities 
will dry up. Allocating an additional $18,525,000 to the Bureau of 
Reclamation for OGWRP will help save these communities and protect 
annual economic activity that sustains the region.
    The League recognizes the Senate Committee on Appropriations, and 
the Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development face numerous 
challenges as a part of the FY2022 appropriations process. We greatly 
appreciate the efforts of the Appropriations Committee as it works to 
address these challenges. We also appreciate the support and work of 
the Bureau of Reclamation, the State of Washington, and Washington&#x27;s 
Congressional delegation. Their efforts are integral to meeting current 
and future water supply needs.
    Chairman Feinstein and Ranking Member Kennedy, thank you again for 
giving the League the opportunity to provide testimony and thank you 
for your efforts to fund our nation&#x27;s water infrastructure. Please let 
us know if the League and its members can be of assistance to you 
during this process.
    Respectfully.

    [This statement was submitted by Vicky Scharlau, Executive 
Director, Columbia Basin Development League.]
                                 ______
                                 
 Prepared Statement of the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission
    Madam Chair and members of the subcommittee, the Columbia River 
Inter-Tribal Fish Commission (CRITFC) is pleased to share its view on 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) FY2022 budget. My testimony 
addresses FY 2022 and includes a summary of Corps projects developing 
in coming years. We specifically identify the following FY 2022 
requests:
  --$25.7 million--Columbia River Fish Mitigation--WA-OR-ID
    --$22M--Columbia River Biological Opinion
    --$3.7M--Willamette River Biological Opinion
  --$3.0 million--John Day Mitigation/The Dalles Dam Pre-Engineering 
        and Design with FY 2022 Workplan support
  --$1.01 million--Tribal Partnership Program (TPP) for a Columbia 
        River Zone 6 Tributary Delta Feasibility Study to address 
        sediment management issues
    The CRITFC request will support implementation of the Columbia 
River and Willamette River Biological Opinions, continued funding 
support for the full implementation of the John Day/The Dalles Dam 
Mitigation program and funds for the initiation of a Tribal 
Participation Project focused on Columbia River Bonneville Pool 
sediment issues. We appreciate the support in FY 2021 for Corps-
implemented Pacific lamprey projects in fulfillment of federal 
commitments under the Columbia Basin Fish Accords.
    Program Description: The Corps&#x27; Columbia River Fisheries Mitigation 
(CRFM) program mitigates impacts to anadromous fish resulting from the 
development and operation of federal dams on the mainstem Columbia and 
Snake rivers. Authority for this program is contained in the original 
Congressional dam construction and operation authorities.
    The partnership between the Corps and the Lower Columbia River 
treaty tribes has expanded under the Columbia Basin Fish Accords. 
Multiple projects have been developed, funded, and completed. The 
record of success drove the agreement for a four-year extension of the 
Accords (2019-2022) to support projects in progress or in development.
    Reviewing the BiOp and Proposed Action (PA) and commitments made in 
those documents, this level of funding is inadequate to meet these 
needs let alone additional needs that the tribes and other regional 
entities have identified. In addition, new needs are becoming more 
apparent such as the need for additional detections both upstream and 
downstream of Bonneville Dam to ensure reach survivals can be 
calculated. The new flex spill program has, through its success of 
diverting more migrating fish away from powerhouses, reduced detections 
and thus made it challenging if not impossible to estimate reach 
survivals. Future management actions will be based on this information. 
The BiOp and PA also outline a need to evaluate the flex spill program 
yet no funds have been identified for this.
    The operation and management budget (O&amp;M) has been flat funded and 
continues to be so. However, the new BiOp and PA has shifted more 
actions and responsibilities to the O&amp;M budget, such as avian 
dissuasion and monitoring in the estuary. When one considers inflation 
and salary increase, it is apparent that this is an untenable position. 
These plans are requiring more from a budget that is already stretched 
too thin. The O&amp;M budget is struggling to maintain the existing system 
let alone dealing with the aging infrastructure without even 
considering new obligations.
    The Tribes are concerned that the Administration&#x27;s trend in recent 
years of decreases to the CRFM budgets and this year&#x27;s more than 29% 
proposed decrease in funding for CRFM--Columbia River leaves critical 
projects without budget support resulting in, for example:
    --Reduction in management for avian predators, including the 
            estuary and dam tailraces;
    --Delay of the Bonneville Dam Second Powerhouse fish guidance 
            improvement that would benefit both power operations and 
            fish survival;
    --Reductions by half the Corps&#x27; contribution to habitat 
            improvements in the Columbia River estuary;
    --Reductions by more than half of funds needed for research and 
            development in the CRFM project area; and
    --Additional pressures on already under-funded operations and 
            maintenance budgets.
    Recently, the Corps expanded the purposes of CRFM to include 
implementation of fish passage related improvements to Corps dams in 
the Willamette River basin and implementation of lamprey passage 
improvements at mainstem dams on the Columbia and Snake rivers through 
agreements detailed in the Columbia Basin Fish Accords. The revised 
cost and schedule from the Corps is calculated at $2.79 million through 
2023. The Administration&#x27;s request is contrary to that schedule.
John Day &amp; The Dalles Fish Mitigation: Achieving In-place, In-kind 
        Mitigation
    Prior to hydropower development, the mainstem Columbia River from 
Celilo Falls to the confluence of the Snake River was one of the most 
important spawning and early rearing areas for upriver bright fall 
chinook. Construction of The Dalles Dam in 1957 and John Day Dam in 
1967 inundated much of the available spawning habitat for fall chinook 
in the mainstem Columbia River. In the John Day and The Dalles Dam 
Mitigation program (JDTDM) Congress authorized the Corps to mitigate 
for anticipated future natural production losses caused by construction 
of the dams as early as 1948. Funding for JDTDM was used initially to 
produce fall chinook at Bonneville State Hatchery and Spring Creek 
National Fish Hatchery, both of which are located downstream from the 
areas affected by the John Day and The Dalles dams and centuries old 
tribal fisheries.
    While several production program adjustments have occurred in the 
last 10 years, additional work is still needed to meet in-place/in-kind 
mitigation objectives under the COE&#x27;s JDTDM program to put the right 
fish (upriver bright fall chinook) in the right places (in the area 
impacted by the John Day and The Dalles Dams). Additional hatchery 
infrastructure is necessary to accommodate increased production of 
upriver bright fall chinook at an expanded Ringold Springs Hatchery or 
alternative to be developed by the Corps in FY 2022. To implement the 
plan developed in collaboration by the Corps, the treaty tribes and 
state co-managers and federal fish agencies, we anticipate the Corps 
will make a budget request for design and construction at the Ringold 
Springs Hatchery or other suitable alternative for FY 2022.
Pacific Lamprey Restoration Projects Restarted with FY 2020 Workplan 
        Support
    The Corps and the Commission&#x27;s member tribes have been implementing 
a multi-year lamprey plan while simultaneously implementing high 
priority lamprey actions. The Columbia Basin Fish Accords have given 
both flexibility and stability to tribal projects and the contracting 
process. We are able to plan projects over longer--more meaningful--
timeframes and adjust tasks between years, where necessary, for the 
good of the project or to address regional needs. The result is 
improved and more efficient projects and process. And the lamprey 
resource has responded, as measured through increased counts at 
mainstem Columbia River dams, increases in volitional returns of adults 
to the tributaries (guided by larval pheromones), documented spawning 
success, increases in larval abundance, and detections of translocation 
offspring and upper Columbia Basin siblings in the mainstem as 
outmigrants and in adult collections from the ocean. The long and 
complex life cycle of Pacific lamprey ( up to 10 years from hatching 
to returning adults), combined with the lack of homing, requires a 
long-term strategy to address critical uncertainties and support 
conservation and restoration efforts. However, the numbers remain well 
below historical accounts of lamprey populations throughout the 
Columbia Basin. It should be noted that the benefits that lamprey 
provide to other fish and wildlife species cannot be overstated.
    The Tribal-Corps lamprey technical team has worked collaboratively 
to identify priority lamprey actions throughout the Accord and Accord 
Extension periods. We are grateful for the robust commitment of project 
funds in the FY2021 Workplan in fulfillment of the Corps&#x27; four-year 
Accord extension. The Corps, CRITFC member tribes, and others are 
prioritizing the work to be accomplished with this funding. Priority 
actions being discussed include (but are not limited to) evaluating 
juvenile lamprey survival and downstream passage success through 
Columbia and Snake river dams, modifying fishways and lamprey-specific 
structures to improve upstream adult passage, and upgrading tribal 
translocation program infrastructure. Workplan funding has given 
assurance these projects will go forward, the investments made in the 
prior 12 years of work under the Accords will be protected, and lamprey 
populations will begin to reverse their precipitous decline. Based on 
the current inventory of unfunded projects, we expect that similar 
workplan commitments will be on-going into the foreseeable future.
    We ask Congress to fully support the Columbia River and Willamette 
River Biological Opinions through the Columbia River Fish Mitigation 
program above the request to include all capability identified by the 
Corps. These tribal recommendations total $25.7 million for FY2022.
History and Background of the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish 
        Commission
    CRITFC was founded in 1977 by the four Columbia River Treaty 
Tribes: Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, 
Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon, 
Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation, and the Nez Perce 
Tribe. CRITFC provides coordination and technical assistance to these 
tribes in regional, national and international efforts to protect and 
restore our shared salmon resource and the habitat upon which it 
depends. Our collective ancestral homeland covers nearly one-third of 
the entire Columbia River basin in the United States, an area the size 
of the State of Georgia.
    In 1855, the U.S. entered into treaties with the four tribes \1\ 
whereupon we ceded millions of acres of our homelands to the U.S. In 
return, the U.S. pledged to honor our ancestral rights, including the 
right to fish in all Usual and Accustomed locations. Unfortunately, a 
perilous history brought the salmon resource to the edge of extinction 
with 12 salmon and steelhead populations in the Columbia Basin listed 
under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Treaty with the Yakama Nation, June 9, 1855, 12 Stat. 951; 
Treaty with the Tribes of Middle Oregon, June 25, 1855, 12 Stat. 963; 
Treaty with the Umatilla Tribe, June 9, 1855, 12 Stat. 945; Treaty with 
the Nez Perce Tribe, June 11, 1855, 12 Stat. 957.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The CRITFC tribes are globally recognized leaders in fisheries 
restoration and management working in collaboration with state, 
federal, and private entities. We are principals in the region&#x27;s 
efforts to halt the decline of salmon, lamprey, and sturgeon 
populations and rebuild them to levels that support ceremonial, 
subsistence, and commercial harvests. To achieve these objectives, our 
actions emphasize &#x27;gravel-to-gravel&#x27; management including 
supplementation of natural stocks, restoring healthy watersheds, and 
committing to collaborative efforts.
Ongoing and Future Need Areas Addressing Sedimentation in Lower 
        Columbia Pools
    Years of sediment accumulation behind federal hydropower projects 
in the lower Columbia River, and especially at the mouths of 
tributaries, is affecting the physical and biological characteristics 
of project reservoirs.
    These characteristics are manifesting in ecosystem distress, 
navigation problems, and limiting access to treaty-protected tribal 
fishing access sites. Sediment accumulation affects invasive and non-
native species management, anadromous fish migration, water quality 
temperature impairment, tribal fishing sites access, navigation 
hazards, increased need and risk in providing emergency response, and 
increased risk for recreational activities.
    The Corps, in partnership with the Columbia River treaty tribes, 
have initiated work under the Water Resources Development Act and the 
Tribal Partnership Program on a feasibility study to identify a suite 
of possible management actions needed to address sediment issues in the 
Bonneville Pool on the Washington side of the river. Lessons learned in 
this pilot effort will be expanded to the Oregon side of the river as 
well as upstream into the other reservoirs created by the Columbia 
River Power System.
    In summary, through the combined efforts of the four Columbia River 
treaty tribes, supported by a staff of experts, we are proven natural 
resource managers. Our activities benefit the region while also being 
essential to the U.S. obligation under treaties, federal trust 
responsibility, federal statutes, and court orders. We ask for your 
continued support of our efforts. We are prepared to provide additional 
information you may require on our views of the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers FY2022 Budget. Contact: Paul Ward, Director of Governmental 
Affairs, CRITFC, warp@critfc.org.

    [This statement was submitted by Jeremy Takala, Chairman, Columbia 
River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission
                                 ______
                                 
        Prepared Statement of Dolores Water Conservancy District
    I am requesting your support for appropriations in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery 
Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation Program. 
The budget items and amounts requested in the President&#x27;s budget for 
these programs are described below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    Dolores Water Conservancy District believes that this program, 
which is successfully recovering the four ESA listed Upper Colorado and 
San Juan River Basin species, remains our best avenue to sustain our 
rural economy in southwestern Colorado in compliance with the necessary 
conservation of these fish. Any cessation of these programs would 
jeopardize the years of positive progress made to date and have 
rippling effects through our rural farming community supported by the 
Dolores Project, an integral part of the Colorado Ute Indian Rights 
Settlement.
    I appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Kenneth W. Curtis III, General 
Manger, 
Dolores Water Conservancy District.]
                                 ______
                                 
          Prepared Statement of the Edison Electric Institute
    The Edison Electric Institute (EEI) submits this testimony for the 
record to the Senate Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Energy 
and Water Development regarding fiscal year (FY) 2022 carbon-free 
energy research, development, demonstration, and commercial 
applications (RDD&amp;CA) activities for the Department of Energy (DOE).
    EEI is the association that represents all U.S. investor-owned 
electric companies. Our members provide electricity for 220 million 
Americans and operate in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. As 
a whole, the electric power industry supports more than 7 million jobs 
in communities across the United States. In addition to our U.S. 
members, EEI has more than 65 international electric companies as 
International Members, and hundreds of industry suppliers and related 
organizations as Associate Members. We are united in our commitment to 
get the energy we provide as clean as we can as fast as we can, without 
compromising on the reliability or affordability that are essential to 
the customers and communities we serve. Overall, carbon emissions from 
the electric power sector are at their lowest level since 1978-and 
continue to fall. Collectively, EEI&#x27;s member companies are on a path to 
reduce their carbon emissions at least 80 percent by 2050, compared 
with 2005 levels, with many companies pledging to reduce their 
emissions even further and even faster. As of 2020, the industry is 40 
percent below 2005 carbon emission levels. And, 40 percent of our 
nation&#x27;s electricity comes from carbon-free resources.
    Existing technologies can get us much of the way to a 100-percent 
clean energy future. Completing the work will require new, affordable, 
carbon-free, 24/7 technologies. As a result, there is an urgent need to 
significantly increase investments in these new clean energy 
technologies. Technology will drive the timeline to a 100-percent clean 
energy future.
    Because of how electric companies are regulated at the state and 
federal levels, they cannot invest heavily in RDD&amp;CA of new 
technologies; our industry is not like others, such as the defense or 
pharmaceutical industries, which spend billions of dollars annually on 
research and development (R&amp;D) activities. This is a major reason why 
EEI believes we cannot afford a ``business-as-usual&#x27;&#x27; approach to 
federal investments in carbon-free power technologies. The federal 
government&#x27;s RDD&amp;CA activities are a critical resource for our 
industry.
    EEI has joined with non-governmental organizations to form the 
Carbon-Free Technology Initiative (CFTI), which is focused on 
implementation of federal policies that can help ensure the commercial 
availability of affordable, carbon-free, 24/7 power technology options 
by the early 2030s, when EEI&#x27;s member companies must make investment 
decisions that will enable them to reach their longer-term climate 
commitments. The CFTI includes EEI and its member electric companies, 
Clean Air Task Force, Bipartisan Policy Center, Center for Climate and 
Energy Solutions, ClearPath, Great Plains Institute, Information 
Technology &amp; Innovation Foundation, Nuclear Energy Institute, and Third 
Way.
    The CFTI focuses on policy recommendations to advance a number of 
key technology areas:
  --Long-duration energy storage and advanced demand efficiency;
  --Advanced, 24/7, and renewable super hot rock deep geothermal;
  --Zero-carbon fuels, such as hydrogen;
  --Advanced nuclear energy (both fission and fusion);
  --Carbon capture, utilization, and storage; and
  --Advanced wind and solar energy systems.
    CFTI also supports the creation of a domestic supply chain and 
increased demonstration projects for advanced clean energy 
technologies.
    For FY 2022, CFTI recommends a nearly tripling of funds above the 
roughly $4.2 billion authorized levels for specific DOE RDD&amp;CA programs 
for carbon-free power-sector technologies. Funding projects beyond R&amp;D 
will be critical to achieving deep carbon reductions. At a minimum, key 
new authorizations from the Energy Act of 2020 should be fully funded 
in FY 2022 and should be increased above authorization levels through 
FY 2025.
    The President&#x27;s budget request for FY 2022 invests more than $10 
billion in clean energy innovation across multiple non-defense 
agencies, DOE&#x27;s budget request would make historic investments that 
would lay the foundation to build a clean energy economy and help the 
electric power industry reach its long-term carbon emission reduction 
goals.
    We are very pleased that the President&#x27;s budget request includes 
$400 million to create the Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations at 
DOE. This new entity would become the hub for scaling up near- and mid-
term clean energy technology projects and provide awards for multi-year 
demonstration projects in conjunction with private-sector partners. The 
CFTI recommends the creation of the new office. It is essential that 
the federal government play a role in demonstrating new clean energy 
technologies to help provide enough certainty about the performance of 
a technology that lenders, plant owners, and customers consider it to 
be sufficiently de-risked for commercial use.
                            advanced nuclear
    We recommend $2.23 billion in FY 2022 funding for high-priority 
advanced nuclear programs. This would include:
  --Doubling appropriations to at least $340 million per FY for 5 years 
        for nuclear fission technologies R&amp;D within the light water 
        sustainability reactor program, advanced reactor technology 
        program, and used nuclear fuel disposition program;
  --Providing up to $900 million per FY for the next 5 years to ensure 
        that the Versatile Test Reactor (VTR) will come online by 2026;
  --Establishing multi-year funding sufficient to support the existing 
        Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program (ARDP) and providing 
        continuing rounds of risk reduction awards to the projects 
        awarded under ARDP&#x27;s first phase, as well as expanding ARDP to 
        fund additional projects, including additional awards for the 
        commercial demonstration of 3 Generation IV reactor designs and 
        an award for the commercial demonstration of 2 micro-reactor 
        technologies that can be commercially deployed by 2027;
  --Maintaining funding for existing programs benefitting advanced 
        reactor development, such as the advanced small modular reactor 
        cost-share; and
  --Providing additional and consistent funding of at least $150 
        million per FY for at least 5 years to the Nuclear Regulatory 
        Commission for advanced reactor licensing.
    In addition, we recommend providing $1.2 billion per FY for the 
next 5 years for the applied fusion program that was authorized in the 
Energy Act of 2020.
                             energy storage
    We recommend funding critical energy storage programs at the $648 
million authorized level for FY 2022 and focusing the funding on 
longer-duration storage. We support:
  --Maintaining or increasing funding for Energy Storage Grand 
        Challenge, Grid Storage Launchpad, HydroWIRES, and ARPA-E DAYS;
  --Increasing appropriations for the Grid Modernization Initiative 
        (GMI) and ARPA-E&#x27;s Green Electricity Network Integration 
        (GENI);
  --Establishing a financial assistance program to support demand 
        efficiency R&amp;D and pilot demonstrations involving upgraded 
        software platforms, power system planning tools, and modeling 
        platforms; and
  --Directing DOE to utilize existing grant funding programs to 
        prioritize pilot demonstration projects involving the 
        integration of demand efficiency technologies.
                           zero-carbon fuels
    We recommend appropriating $3.43 billion in FY 2022 for high-
priority RDD&amp;CA activities for zero-carbon fuels (ZCF), such as 
hydrogen. We support:
  --Providing DOE with approximately $3 billion annually to support 
        integrated demonstrations on a variety of use cases with ZCF 
        and increasing appropriations for ZCF-related RDD&amp;CA efforts to 
        $400 million per FY;
  --Fully funding at FY 2020 levels for at least 5 years (a 5-year, $50 
        million initiative) the H2NEW consortium and other existing 
        Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies (HFTO) consortia; and
  --Increasing funding for HFTO and other DOE offices to create new 
        consortia of electric companies and other types of energy and 
        infrastructure companies to foster one or more integrated ZCF 
        ``value chain&#x27;&#x27; demonstrations.
            carbon capture, utilization, and storage (ccus)
    Carbon capture for natural gas facilities is critical given the 
essential role that natural gas plays in providing 24/7 electricity as 
companies continue to add variable resources to the grid. For FY 2022, 
we recommend $4.995 billion for critical CCUS programs. We support:
  --Establishing an additional grant program with at least $1.2 billion 
        per FY for the 5 years that would be available to commercial-
        scale carbon capture projects to complete construction;
  --Appropriating at least $500 million per FY through FY 2025 to 
        facilitate the commercialization of large-scale saline storage 
        locations with the capacity to accept at least 10 million tons 
        of carbon dioxide (CO2);
  --Increasing appropriations by $100 million annually for 5 fiscal 
        years to provide funding to cover front-end engineering and 
        design (FEED) studies for commercial-scale capture plants;
  --Increasing appropriations to $700 million over the next 5 years for 
        the Carbon Storage Assurance Facility Enterprise (CarbonSAFE) 
        program to complete existing projects under Phase VI (covers 
        six existing projects), and to initiate at least 4 new 
        CarbonSAFE projects and provide support for their completion 
        from Phase I to Phase VI;
  --Increasing appropriations to $450-650 million per FY for at least 5 
        years for the Office of Fossil Energy&#x27;s activities to improve 
        the cost and performance of capture technologies;
  --Providing $20 million for FEED study grants for CO2 transportation 
        infrastructure.
                  super hot rock (shr) deep geothermal
    We recommend appropriating $100 million in FY 2022 for SHR deep 
geothermal, including:
  --At least $30 million per FY for 5 years for a dedicated program and 
        laboratory focus on SHR geothermal innovation through 
        coordination between ARPA-E and the Geothermal Technologies 
        Office; and
  --$70 million per FY for 5 years to support demonstration projects 
        under different scenarios.
                     advanced wind and solar energy
    We recommend funding advanced wind and solar programs at the $425 
million authorized funding level in FY 2022. In particular, we 
recommend identifying specific cost reduction targets and timetables 
across the value chain for advanced renewables R&amp;D to help achieve cost 
targets by 2030 and amending R&amp;D priorities to include offshore wind, 
onshore wind, solar, grid modernization, and end-of-life reuse.

    [This statement was submitted by Thomas R. Kuhn, President, Edison 
Electric 
Institute.]
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of the Electric Drive Transportation Association
    The Electric Drive Transportation Association (EDTA) is the cross-
industry trade association promoting the advancement of electric drive 
technology and electrified transportation. We are writing to support 
robust FY2022 funding for the Department of Energy (DOE) electric 
transportation programs, including the Vehicle Technologies Program, 
Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office, ARPA-E, ARPA-C, Department 
of Energy Loan Programs, and Clean Cities. DOE&#x27;s research, development 
and deployment programs speed clean technology innovation, increase 
U.S. competitiveness and will play an important role in achieving the 
Administration&#x27;s goals for electric transportation.
    EDTA&#x27;s members represent the entire value chain of electric drive, 
including vehicle manufacturers, battery and component manufacturers, 
utilities and energy companies, smart grid and charging infrastructure 
developers. Collectively, we are committed to realizing the economic, 
national security and environmental benefits of displacing oil with 
electricity in hybrid, plug-in hybrid, battery, and fuel cell electric 
vehicles. The Department&#x27;s research and work with private partners will 
help the many industries that comprise the electric drive ecosystem to 
meet net zero emissions goals.
    This Committee has consistently recognized that electric 
transportation is critical to the effort to reduce emissions, create 
good-paying jobs and livable communities and increase U.S. 
competitiveness in the global marketplace. In her testimony to the 
Subcommittee on May 6, 2021, Secretary Granholm echoed that 
recognition, emphasizing the Department&#x27;s role in addressing climate 
change, including over funding opportunities to advance clean energy 
R&amp;D projects and the Department&#x27;s loan programs, including Title 17 and 
Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing (ATVM).
    The importance of electrifying transportation has been widely 
documented. Emissions from the transportation sector have exceeded 
those from power plants since 2016. Electric transportation solutions 
reduce emissions, while advancing our leadership in global energy 
technology markets. The Union of Concerned Scientists studied the total 
emissions reductions of electric drive in every region of the country. 
The study found that no matter where in the U.S. an EV is charged and 
operated, it has fewer total well-to-wheels emissions than the average 
gasoline-powered vehicle sold today.
    Electrification is also a national security imperative. In 2019, 
the transportation sector accounted for approximately 28 percent of the 
nation&#x27;s energy use; 91 percent of that energy came from petroleum 
fuels. This reliance is a chronic threat to U.S. energy and economic 
security. It also keeps consumers vulnerable to volatile markets and 
fluctuating prices for petroleum.
    As the global transportation sector electrifies, the U.S. needs to 
secure leadership in this market. By 2040, electric vehicles are 
projected to account for 58 percent of all passenger vehicle sales and 
make-up more than one-third of the global fleet. Electrification is 
growing in all transportation applications: 67 percent of municipal 
buses, 47 percent of two-wheelers, and 24 percent of light-duty 
commercial vehicles are expected to be electric by 2040. International 
governments have made clear their intentions to dominate this market. 
China is investing heavily in research and development, expanding 
efforts to secure critical component materials.
    EDTA also supports efforts to strengthen and diversify the battery 
supply chain and expand advanced manufacturing capacity in the U.S. We 
support the Department&#x27;s initiatives to fund R&amp;D for advanced battery 
materials and the use of ATVM loans to build, update, re-tool, and 
expand manufacturing facilities to support this domestic imperative.
    DOE&#x27;s portfolio of electrification programs is vital to addressing 
these emissions, security and competitiveness challenges. Specifically, 
DOE&#x27;s Vehicle Technologies Program is a critical element of the 
national effort to decarbonize transportation, leveraging private 
sector investments to promote innovation in advanced vehicles, 
infrastructure and manufacturing chains. The program advances research 
in batteries and power electronics, electric drive motors, components 
and charging technologies. Increased range, reduced costs, and improved 
performance are battery advances supported by the Battery and Electric 
Drive Technology subprogram. Critical supporting infrastructure, 
including charging systems and codes and standards for communication 
with the grid, are being developed in the Vehicle Systems Simulation &amp; 
Testing program.
    The Vehicle Technologies Program is also advancing electric 
alternatives in commercial vehicles. The truck and transit segment is 
projected to grow rapidly in the next two decades. Research, 
demonstration, and deployment of electric drive technologies for 
combination tractors, heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans and vocational 
vehicle technologies&#x27; systems and components will speed technology 
breakthroughs and contribute to cost reductions while providing public 
health benefits and energy cost savings throughout the economy.
    The SuperTruck 3 Program is an important part of this effort. We 
support increased program investment in Class 7 and Class 8 vehicles, 
which are a significant part of the commercial fleet. An expanded 
program should continue to engage partners from across the 
manufacturing chain--chassis original equipment manufacturers, 
intermediate and final stage manufacturers, including hybrid system 
suppliers, and infrastructure providers--to improve performance in 
vocational vehicles.
    Through the Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office, DOE is 
working with industry to accelerate the availability of fuel cell 
electric vehicles, which are essential zero-emission options in the 
transportation portfolio. Three light-duty fuel cell vehicles are 
commercially available today, with several new models planned for 
release through 2023, including buses and trucks in the medium- and 
heavy-duty segment. At the same time, hydrogen fueling infrastructure 
is being built out as a critical component of this emerging market.
    The Department&#x27;s recently announced Hydrogen Shot is an important 
program to reduce the cost of clean hydrogen to advance the deployment 
of light-, medium-, and heavy-duty fuel cell vehicles. Developing lower 
costing carbon-free hydrogen is a critical step in cutting emissions 
for long-haul trucking, last mile delivery vehicles, light-duty 
passenger vehicles, and other industrial applications. Hydrogen Shot&#x27;s 
goal of achieving $1 per kilogram for clean carbon--an 80% reduction--
will help create good-paying jobs while supporting American innovation.
    We ask that the Subcommittee continue its record of support for 
these programs, particularly in vehicle and infrastructure deployment 
activities and in early market development, education, validation and 
enabling activities. At this early market juncture, public/private 
collaborations are especially important in accelerating technology 
development and private infrastructure investment.
    ARPA-E has advanced pre-commercial technologies such as Robust 
Affordable Next Generation Energy Storage Systems (RANGE) and Batteries 
for Electrical Energy Storage in Transportation (BEEST) that improve 
performance and reduce costs of batteries. The program can also 
expedite innovation in critical materials, secondary uses and recycling 
of batteries. ARPA-E&#x27;s role is essential in overcoming high-risk 
technological barriers that the private sector may not attempt in the 
early stages of research and development.
    Similarly, ARPA-C would develop technologies to help move the U.S. 
toward a net zero economy by 2050. This new initiative&#x27;s focus on zero-
emission vehicles and transit systems, carbon-free hydrogen, and energy 
storage are key levers in achieving net zero emissions. Reducing 
emissions across all segments of the economy will benefit all 
communities, especially low-income and BIPOC communities who are 
disproportionately affected by poor air quality.
    As the Administration has highlighted with its procurement goals, 
the federal government can lead the electrification of transportation, 
reducing the fleet&#x27;s energy costs and its carbon footprint. At the same 
time, government purchasing power will reinforce private investment in 
infrastructure, and promote the development of advanced power and 
storage solutions that maximize the potential of electric vehicles as a 
grid asset.
    EDTA also strongly supports the Clean Cities program. Clean Cities 
works with nearly 100 local and regional coalitions to expand 
deployment of electric drive and alternative fuel cars and trucks and 
recharging/fueling infrastructure. These voluntary and locally driven 
efforts have a demonstrated record of success, including the cumulative 
displacement of more than 8.5 billion gallons of petroleum with 
alternative fuels since the program began in 1993.
    We appreciate the Committee&#x27;s long-standing support for the 
important research, development and deployment programs at Department 
of Energy. These programs will play an even more critical role in 
achieving the Administration&#x27;s goals for net-zero emissions by 2050 and 
in speeding the electrification of the transportation sector. We 
respectfully request that appropriations for FY2022 reflect the 
magnitude of our national energy, economic and environmental challenges 
and the enormous opportunities to address them through electric 
transportation innovation.
    Thank you for your consideration.

    [This statement was submitted by Genevieve Cullen, President, 
Electric Drive Transportation Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
    We, the undersigned, write today to urge you to support robust 
energy efficiency investments at the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)&#x27;s 
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE). Investing in 
energy efficiency is an investment not only in reducing energy costs 
for consumers and businesses across the nation; it is an investment in 
domestic job creation, manufacturing, competitiveness, and innovation. 
Energy efficiency improves energy affordability, security, reliability, 
and resilience; it achieves these outcomes by simply doing more with 
less. Today, the United States uses two-thirds less energy than it 
would otherwise consume without the investments in energy efficiency 
since 1980, according to the American Council for an Energy-Efficient 
Economy.
    Energy efficiency is a workhorse, leading the clean energy sector 
at more than 2 million jobs, down from nearly 2.4 million prior to the 
pandemic. Energy efficiency jobs are located in 99.7% of counties 
across all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Energy efficiency 
jobs support families, with workers earning 28% more than the national 
median, according to Environmental Entrepreneurs, and cannot be 
exported. Furthermore, EERE RDD&amp;D programs enable cost-effective 
emissions reductions and energy affordability through innovative 
partnerships and focused deployment programs that shepherd emerging 
technologies from concept to market, enabling cost reductions for 
businesses and consumers, and achieving critical scale needed to avoid 
the worst impacts of the climate crisis.
    We respectfully request FY2022 regular appropriations funding for 
the following DOE programs:
    Buildings Technologies (BTO): $530 million to develop innovative, 
cost-effective technologies, tools, and solutions that help U.S. 
homeowners, consumers, and businesses achieve peak energy efficiency 
performance in their buildings across all sectors of our economy. 
Robust funding is needed for:
  --Residential Buildings Integration (RBI): $80 million for DOE to 
        collaborate with the residential building industry to improve 
        the energy efficiency of both new and existing homes. RBI 
        develops critical technologies, tools, and solutions that help 
        U.S. consumers and businesses achieve peak efficiency 
        performance in residential buildings across the country. RBI&#x27;s 
        work supports workforce development and training and has 
        partnerships with thousands of small businesses in this sector, 
        the construction trades, equipment, smart grid technology and 
        systems suppliers, integrators, and state and local 
        governments. The integration research, demonstration and market 
        transformation activities of RBI are critical as we transform 
        America&#x27;s new and existing residential buildings and work 
        towards the Administration&#x27;s goal of weatherizing 2 million 
        homes.
  --Commercial Building Integration (CBI): $80 million for the 
        program&#x27;s research, development, and evaluation, to help 
        advance a range of innovative building technologies and 
        solutions, paving the way for high performing buildings that 
        could use between 50% and 70% less energy than typical 
        buildings. CBI works with industry, small businesses, academia, 
        the national labs, and other entities to advance energy 
        efficiency solutions and technologies for commercial buildings. 
        The program, which considers buildings as systems and as part 
        of the electric grid, continues to be transformative in moving 
        industry partners to embrace innovation.
  --Efficiency Standards, Building Codes, and Test Procedures: $60 
        million for appliance standards and $100 million for the 
        Building Energy Codes Program. DOE is responsible for setting 
        minimum energy efficiency standards for appliances, equipment, 
        and lighting to ensure new models continue to make progress on 
        efficiency as technology matures. The Department is far behind 
        in issuing new appliance standards, making an increased focus 
        critical. DOE plays an important support and technical 
        assistance role in the development and implementation of 
        building energy codes, which are adopted by states and local 
        governments for new construction and renovations of residential 
        and commercial buildings, that reflect developments in building 
        energy efficiency and ``lock in&#x27;&#x27; savings for the life of the 
        building. Education, training, and technical assistance have 
        been woefully underfunded over the past several years and can 
        be very impactful in assisting in codes&#x27; adoption and effective 
        implementation.
  --Emerging Technologies (ET): $160 million for the program to enable 
        cost-effective, energy-efficient technologies to be developed 
        and introduced into the marketplace. ET funds and directs 
        applied research and development (R&amp;D) for technologies and 
        tools that support building energy efficiency, particularly 
        electric technologies for a carbon free grid.
  --Grid-interactive Efficient Buildings (GEB): $50 million for DOE to 
        ensure that a high level of energy efficiency is a core element 
        of this new crosscutting program and a baseline characteristic 
        for GEBs which are also connected, smart, and flexible. The 
        Office should engage with the public and private sectors, 
        including the building and manufacturing industries and state 
        and local governments, to share information on GEB 
        technologies, costs, and benefits, and to provide information 
        to position American companies to lead in this area. Funding 
        for demonstrations and deployment programs such as Connected 
        Communities, the Low Carbon Buildings Pilot, and other BTO 
        deployment activities is encouraged.
    Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO): $800 million to enable the 
research, development, demonstration and deployment of industrial 
energy efficiency and advanced manufacturing technologies. This level 
of funding is intended to accommodate and ambitious agenda of 
decarbonizing U.S. manufacturing by midcentury. This goal of dramatic 
reductions requires increases in activity level across the office and 
some important changes in the orientation of the office&#x27;s goals. AMO 
should expand its efforts from promoting energy efficiency to include 
efforts to reduce carbon emissions for manufacturing and reduce the 
embodied carbon in manufactured products. Additionally, as AMO rebuilds 
its staffing, the office should focus on adding expertise in important 
decarbonization technology areas identified in its research road 
mapping.
  --Energy Management: $10 million for efforts to promote Strategic 
        Energy Management practices and $30 million for the 
        establishment of a program to provide competitive grants to 
        companies for the hiring or designation of plant energy 
        managers. For Strategic Energy Management, AMO should focus 
        efforts on small- and medium-sized manufacturing plants.
  --Save Carbon Now: $55 million for the Better Plants program to 
        expand that program to offer comprehensive assessment and 
        engagements to the 1,500 largest greenhouse gas emitting 
        manufacturing facilities. These engagements shall include, but 
        not be limited to, targeted assessments, staff training, 
        technical analyses of opportunities, and education.
  --Industrial Assessment Centers: $25 million for the Industrial 
        Assessment Centers (IAC) program to expand that program in 
        order to increase the number of university-based centers to 40; 
        to establish satellite centers at community colleges, technical 
        schools, and union training facilities; and to establish an 
        apprenticeship program with matching funding for IAC students 
        at facilities that have received assessments in the recent past 
        to facilitate the implementation of recommendations.
  --Flex Tech: $40 million for the establishment of a program that 
        provides competitive grants to states and tribal governments in 
        partnership with educational institutions and trade 
        associations to provide assessments of energy and greenhouse 
        gas (GHG) reducing measures and loans to implement those 
        measures to medium sized manufacturers.
  --Transformative Technology Adoption: $100 million for the 
        establishment of a competitive grant program that provides 
        cost-share payments to manufacturing sites or consortiums that 
        make first-three, at-scale implementation of transformative 
        technologies to reduce GHG emissions in the most GHG-intensive 
        manufacturing processes as determined by the Secretary.
  --Existing Low-Carbon Technology: $60 million for the establishment 
        of a competitive grant program to provide cost-share payments 
        to manufacturing plants for the installation of underutilized 
        existing low-carbon technologies.
  --Smart Manufacturing: $30 million for support of the development and 
        adoption of smart manufacturing practices directed towards 
        small and medium-sized manufacturers. This includes, but is not 
        limited to, expanded funding for the Clean Energy Smart 
        Manufacturing Innovative Institute (CESMII) to increase 
        educational and technical assistance activities directed toward 
        smart manufacturing adoption.
  --Industrial Process Heating Decarbonization: $55 million for the 
        establishment of a research, development, and deployment effort 
        by AMO to develop and promote the adoption of technologies that 
        can dramatically reduce the GHG emissions from process heating 
        applications. Efforts may include the establishment of one or 
        more new Manufacturing USA Innovation Institutes that might 
        focus on electrification and/or hydrogen and low-carbon fuels.
    Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP): At least $56 million to 
provide project and policy support to all federal agencies, including 
$2 million for the Performance Based Contract National Resource 
Initiative and at least $20 million for the AFFECT grant program. With 
minimal funding, FEMP supports all agencies of the Federal government 
in their quest to save energy and money for the American taxpayer while 
improving agency infrastructure and addressing deferred maintenance. 
FEMP is at the forefront of efforts to improve federal building energy 
performance, which is accomplished in part by accessing and leveraging 
private capital in performance contracts. The additional private 
capital has been used to finance hundreds of projects across two dozen 
agencies, creating 30,000 jobs and reducing energy outlays by $8 
billion over the next 18 years. Note: Our request for AFFECT represents 
a minimum funding request for FY22 as the initial installment towards 
the President&#x27;s request of $400 million for AFFECT, which we strongly 
support. AFFECT provides small grants to federal agencies to maximize 
their retrofits through performance contracting. AFFECT leverages at 
least $10 for every federal grant dollar invested, thereby maximizing 
federal infrastructure investments and addressing backlog maintenance.
    Weatherization (WAP) and State Energy Program (SEP): $477 million. 
Within this amount, at least $325 million is recommended for WAP, with 
$10 million for training and technical assistance at DOE, and $21 
million for the new Weatherization Readiness Fund. At least $121 
million is recommended for State Energy Program grants including $25 
million to be used for energy and related air quality in schools. At 
least $90 million of the SEP funds shall be utilized for direct formula 
grants to the states, with $6 million for technical assistance. Since 
1976, WAP has helped make more than 8 million homes more efficient, 
saving the average recipient about $4,200 over the lifetime of their 
home. R&amp;D investments will continue to make emerging technologies 
cheaper and more accessible, but DOE&#x27;s Weatherization Assistance 
Program is particularly important for bringing energy efficiency to 
communities and families that need it most. According to the Energy 
Information costs, while over 12 million households report being unable 
to use their heating or cooling equipment. The Weatherization Readiness 
Fund will provide critical repairs to prepare homes for weatherization 
while increased training and technical assistance will empower DOE to 
implement modernized and innovative practices. Each WAP dollar produces 
$4.50 in benefits, including energy savings as well as improved health 
and safety. Federal weatherization assistance also helps workers and 
small businesses, directly supporting more than 8,500 jobs and 
supporting thousands more in related industries. SEP leverages over $10 
for every federal dollar invested and saves over $7 for every federal 
dollar invested. In addition to energy efficiency and renewable energy 
programs, SEP is critical for dealing with cyber security and energy 
emergency preparedness and response. SEP is extremely flexible and is 
the basis for a variety of partnership programs.
    U.S. Energy &amp; Employment Report (USEER): $2 million for the Office 
of Policy to complete the annual U.S. energy employment report that 
includes a comprehensive statistical survey to collect data, publish 
the data and provide a summary report. The information collected will 
include data related to employment figures and demographics in the U.S. 
energy sector. The report presents a unique snapshot of energy 
efficiency employment in key sectors of the economy, including 
construction and manufacturing.
    Energy Information Administration: $135 million to continue 
important data collection, analysis, and reporting activities on energy 
use and consumption including the Commercial Buildings Energy 
Consumption Survey and the Residential Buildings Energy Consumption 
Survey.
    We would urge the Subcommittee to consider additional funding 
either through regular appropriations or supplemental funding in the 
event an energy/infrastructure package is considered.
    In the event that opportunity presents itself, we would urge the 
Subcommittee to consider the following additional items:
  --Title VI of the House-passed, FY21 House Energy and Water 
        Development Appropriations Bill as a starting point to fund the 
        State Energy Program (SEP)($730 million--$3.8 billion if 
        adjusted for inflation from the American Recovery and 
        Reinvestment Act [ARRA]) (for base, formula funds), 
        Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP)($3.25 billion--$6.2 
        billion if adjusted for inflation from ARRA) and the Energy 
        Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG) ($2.25 
        billion--$3.9 billion if adjusted for inflation from ARRA) 
        (distributed via the statutory formula, with an increase for 
        the competitive fund);
  --Federal Energy Management Program&#x27;s (FEMP) incremental AFFECT grant 
        funding if not fully funded in annual appropriations as 
        requested in the President&#x27;s FY22 Budget Request of $400 
        million;
  --Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO) large manufacturing energy 
        audits and tech assistance ($1 billion over ten years), 
        establishment of a program at DOE to support the hiring of 
        energy managers by paying a portion of annual salary costs ($1 
        billion over ten years), and a federal program to provide 
        grants to states to fund follow-up project implementation 
        following assessments ($1 billion over ten years);
  --Building Technology Office (increase to $100 million for building 
        energy codes training and technical assistance and an increase 
        of $50 million for grid interactive efficient buildings);
  --HOPE for HOMES program to advance workforce training and 
        residential retrofit rebates supported by the President&#x27;s 
        Budget Request ($2 billion); and
  --``Open Back Better&#x27;&#x27; (Smith/Blunt-Rochester legislation to fund 
        resilience upgrades at mission-critical facilities with private 
        financing for energy efficiency and renewable energy 
        investments), which is scalable and could be implemented 
        through the existing SEP and AFFECT programs.
    We stand ready to work with Congress, the White House, and federal 
agencies, to identify ways the U.S. can improve the affordability and 
access of energy-efficient technologies, unlock utility savings for 
consumers, reduce energy-related carbon emissions, and improve public 
health.
    Sincerely.

A. O. Smith
Acuity Brands Lighting Inc.
Alliance to Save Energy
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE)
Association of Energy Engineers (AEE)
Building Performance Association (BPA)
Digital Climate Alliance (DCA)
E4TheFuture
Environmental and Energy Study Institute
Federal Performance Contracting Coalition
Intel Corporation
International Copper Association
Institute for Market Transformation (IMT)
National Association of State Community Services Programs (NASCSP)
National Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO)
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
Polyisocyanurate Insulation Manufacturers Association (PIMA)
Schneider Electric
U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC)
Uplight
      
                                 ______
                                 
      Prepared Statement of the Federal Energy Management Program
    Chairman Leahy, Ranking Member Shelby, and members of the 
Subcommittee, as you deliberate on the important programs to be funded 
in the FY22 appropriations bills, we respectfully request that $36 
million be allocated to the Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) in 
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) at the 
Department of Energy (DOE) with an additional $400 million designated 
to the FEMP Federal Energy Efficiency Fund (FEEF), also known as AFFECT 
grants.
    We also request the following report language be included:
    ``The Committee directs FEMP to prioritize the full amount 
allocated to the Federal Energy Efficiency Fund (FEEF) (formally 
referred to as AFFECT) to continue to be used to leverage private 
sector investment in federal infrastructure to ensure maximum overall 
investment in resiliency, efficiency, emissions reductions and 
security. Funding should be directed to projects that achieve a 5-1 
return for each federal dollar through public-private partnerships like 
energy savings performance contracts (ESPCs) and utility energy service 
contracts (UESCs).&#x27;&#x27;
    The President&#x27;s FY22 Budget request included $400 million to be 
FEMP with an increase in the funding for FEEF. The FPCC recommends that 
this funding continue to be leveraged with performance contracting to 
address resiliency, backlog maintenance, critical upgrade and 
maintenance needs, and other infrastructure on our federal sites such 
as military bases, VA hospitals and GSA building. The FPCC knows that 
we can address such critical infrastructure needs using much less 
dedicated federal dollars through performance contracting and the FEEF 
program facilitates just that.
    The FPCC believes that using smaller amounts of appropriated 
dollars for particular priorities such as cybersecurity and resiliency 
will net more: more dollars invested in the federal government, more 
resiliency, more savings over time, and more attention to operations 
and maintenance, and replacement costs. In fact, fewer dollars can be 
appropriated overall if they are leveraged with private sector dollars 
allowing not only the ability to focus precious federal resources on 
mission, but also transferring the risk of projects to the private 
sector. With this increase in the FEEF program, hundreds of additional 
buildings and facilities across the agencies can utilize grants to make 
reduce the carbon emissions from its facilities and make these 
buildings more efficient.
    FEMP is the appropriate place for these dollars as they will be 
available to leverage performance contracting for all federal agencies. 
For the past several years, FEMP has provided small amounts of 
appropriated dollars to leverage performance contracting through the 
AFFECT Grant program. The $11 million appropriated in FY2020 was 
invested in 16 projects that when combined with the investment from the 
private sector could surpass $439 million. These projects, which focus 
on new technologies and resiliency, will help agencies across the 
federal government address backlog maintenance, which the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) estimates is $169 billion government wide. 
It would specifically address the $9-15 billion in energy related 
backlog maintenance already identified in Congressionally mandated 
audits (EISA 2007, Section 432), which must now be addressed after the 
passage of the Energy Policy Act of 2020 included as part of the 
omnibus package.
    FEMP, with very minimal funding, supports all agencies of the 
federal government in their quest to save energy and money for the 
American taxpayer while improving aging infrastructure and addressing 
deferred maintenance. The most significant activity of FEMP, and that 
which utilizes most of its funding, is to support performance 
contracting throughout the government.
    In an Energy Savings Performance Contract (ESPC) or Utility Energy 
Savings Contract (UESC), the private sector works with the government 
customer to develop a project, but then the private company implements 
that project, measures and verifies savings every year, and guarantees 
that the savings will accrue. The private sector is repaid out of these 
guaranteed utility bill savings allowing for no added expenditures by 
the federal government. Since inception, ESPCs have achieved over $20 
billion in guaranteed energy savings across the federal government.
    FEMP&#x27;s role in this is instrumental. It provides the overall 
contract for ease of use for agencies, technical and financial 
assistance, and training for personnel in all federal agencies. 
Additionally, FEMP provides life of contract oversight for every single 
ESPC during the performance period. Because agencies are reducing 
personnel, this is a critical function and was cited as such by the 
Heritage Foundation in a recent report as a necessary FEMP role.
    Utilizing performance contracting to address infrastructure 
improvements instead of using appropriations funds for direct services 
is a commonsense approach that reduces risk to the federal government 
and ensures that projects are well managed since the private sector 
partner must guarantee performance to get paid.
    Over the past few years, when appropriated dollars have been 
scarce, FEMP funding has leveraged between $800 million and $1.4 
billion in private investment in federal infrastructure with no added 
cost to the federal government, using money from existing funding 
streams. A 2013 report by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) 
titled Beyond Guaranteed Savings: Additional Cost Savings Associated 
with ESPC Projects found that for a typical ESPC the actual cost 
savings to the federal government is 174% to 197% of the guaranteed 
savings by the contractor.
    The members of Federal Performance Contracting Coalition (ABM, 
AECOM, Ameresco, Constellation, CEG Solutions, Energy Systems Group, 
Honeywell, Johnson Controls Inc., Noresco, Siemens, Schneider Electric, 
SitelogIQ, Southland Energy, and Trane (an Ingersoll Rand company) know 
firsthand how impactful ESPCs are in saving energy costs, taxpayer 
money, and creating jobs in every state in the country. Our members 
represent approximately 95% of the Energy Savings Performance Contracts 
(ESPCs) in federal facilities.
    Thank you for your consideration of our request.

    [This statement was submitted by Ms. Jennifer Schafer, Executive 
Director, 
Federal Energy Management Program.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the Federation of American Societies for 
                          Experimental Biology
                                summary
    Federal investments in fundamental research have led to remarkable 
progress in the biological and biomedical sciences. Basic research was 
the groundwork for the speed--months instead of years--in the 
development of COVID-19 vaccines, and pre-clinical research, such as 
animal studies, has been essential to every step of achieving medical 
progress.
    Despite Congress&#x27; bipartisan support for investing in science, 
federal funding for research has not kept pace, posing a threat to our 
nation&#x27;s competitiveness. We face a real threat of losing our edge in 
industries such as biotechnology if we do not prioritize increasing 
investments in science and building a diverse workforce.\1\ The U.S. 
spends less on research and development (R&amp;D) than many countries. If 
the U.S. is to be prepared to respond to future threats, our scientific 
leadership must progress. According to Science Is Us, there is the 
added benefit of jobs. STEM supports 69 percent of U.S. gross domestic 
product, touches two out of three workers, and generates $2.3 trillion 
in tax revenue.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ NSF Science Indicators 2018.
    \2\ STEM and the American Workforce. You&#x27;ve heard it before: STEM 
jobs--...by Science is US Medium.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The federal government should commit to robust, predictable, and 
sustained funding increases for science agencies.
                       the doe office of science
    The DOE Office of Science (SC) is the nation&#x27;s largest funder of 
basic physical sciences research. Transformative innovations and 
technologies can be traced to its work, including solar cells, 
superconductors, and nanotechnology.
    Agencies like NIH, NSF, and DOE SC work in concert to advance 
research in key areas including artificial intelligence and genomics. 
SC supports the network of DOE national laboratories and builds and 
operates the most sophisticated, world-class scientific user facilities 
used by over 34,000 researchers from universities, industry, and other 
federal agencies. National Labs were integral to the creation of the 
National Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory and the COVID-19 High 
Performance Computing Consortium that brought together the best minds 
to address Covid.
    Recent budget increases have allowed the office to proceed with key 
facility upgrades. However, for the U.S. to remain at the forefront of 
science and technology, Congress must sustain and expand DOE SC 
infrastructure investments. A FY 2022 budget of $7.4 billion ($380 
million above FY 2021) would enable continued critical facilities 
upgrades and support pathbreaking research in emerging areas such as 
quantum science.
    FASEB FY 2022 recommendation: at least $7.4 billion for DOE SC.

    [This statement was submitted by Ellen Kuo, Associate Director, 
Legislative 
Affairs, FASEB.]
                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of the Fuel Cell &amp; Hydrogen Energy Association
    Chairwoman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and members of the 
Committee, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to discuss the 
funding priorities of the fuel cell and hydrogen industry for Fiscal 
Year 2022. My name is Morry Markowitz and I serve as the President of 
the Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Energy Association (FCHEA). FCHEA is the 
national trade association representing nearly 60 leading companies and 
organizations that are advancing innovative, clean, safe, and reliable 
fuel cell and hydrogen technologies. FCHEA member organizations 
represent the full global supply chain for hydrogen and fuel cells, 
including automakers; material, component, stack and system 
manufacturers; hydrogen producers and energy companies; trade 
associations; utilities; and end users. Collectively, our members 
employ hundreds of thousands of people across the country. On behalf of 
the members of FCHEA, our organization is requesting $300 million for 
hydrogen and fuel cell activities managed by the Hydrogen and Fuel Cell 
Technologies Office (HFTO) within the Office of Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy (EERE) for hydrogen fuel and infrastructure research 
and development, fuel cell research and development, market 
transformation and technology acceleration activities, the H2@Scale 
initiative, safety, codes, and standards initiatives for vehicle and 
infrastructure safety, and advanced fuel cell and hydrogen component 
manufacturing. FCHEA requests $100 million for EERE&#x27;s Advanced 
Manufacturing Office (AMO) to work in conjunction with HFTO on large-
scale hydrogen production, fuel cell supply chain, infrastructure 
supply, on-site hydrogen production, and hydrogen for industrial 
applications such as materials production and as an alternative heating 
source for industrial processes. FCHEA additionally requests $160 
million for solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) activities and fossil-based 
hydrogen within the Office of Fossil Energy (FE), with $50 million 
reserved for the SOFC Program, and $15 million reserved for the Office 
of Oil and Natural Gas. This funding is vital to completing work on 
fuel cell technologies deployed around the country, as well as fueling 
the transition from fossil sources to renewable hydrogen. Finally, 
recognizing the versatility and numerous applications of hydrogen and 
fuel cells, FCHEA request specific language directing the Department of 
Energy to coordinate hydrogen and fuel cell funding across its 
different offices to ensure the maximum effectiveness of funding.
    Fuel cell and hydrogen energy technologies are capable of 
significantly contributing to the widespread decarbonization of 
transportation, power generation, heating, and industrial markets, 
while providing economic growth through investments and jobs. A recent 
report by McKinsey and Company, Road Map to a US Hydrogen Economy, 
determined that the hydrogen sector has the potential to generate 
700,000 jobs and $140 billion in revenue by 2030. By 2050, that 
economic impact could grow to 3.4 million jobs, $750 billion in 
revenue, 16% reductions CO2 emissions, 36% reduction in 
NOx emissions, and account for 14% of US energy demand.
    Fuel cells generate electricity through a combustion-free 
electrochemical reaction with hydrogen, with the sole byproduct being 
water vapor. Hydrogen is an environmentally friendly fuel, and when 
used in a fuel cell or as feedstock in an industrial process, there are 
no carbon, NOx, SOx, or particulate matter 
emissions. When hydrogen is generated from renewable or low-carbon 
sources--such as wind, solar, biomethane, or natural gas with carbon 
capture and sequestration--carbon emissions are either completely or 
nearly eliminated, or carbon negative.
    Today there are nearly 10,000 light-duty, zero-emission fuel cell 
vehicles (FCVs) operating in California offered by major automakers, 
with more companies planning to enter the marketplace in the near-
future. Fuel cell cars are the only vehicles capable of replicating 
today&#x27;s driving experience of a 300 to 400-mile range on a single tank 
of fuel along with refueling in just three to five minutes. Beyond 
light-duty cars, fuel cells are being used across the country in more 
than 40,000 forklifts, dozens of buses, and several demonstrations of 
Class 7 and 8 trucks. Due to the scalability of fuel cells, hard-to-
decarbonize markets such as medium- and heavy-duty vehicles, aviation, 
and maritime applications are looking to fuel cells as a zero-emission 
alternative for power. McKinsey&#x27;s US Hydrogen Road Map suggests that by 
2030, the fuel cell industry has the capability of reaching 1,200,000 
FCV sales, 4,300 hydrogen fueling stations, and $8 billion in annual 
investments in the United States.
    Fuel cells are also enhancing our capacity, efficiency, and 
reliability of our overall energy system. Stationary fuel cells are 
commercially available with over 550 megawatts of systems deployed 
across the country today at power utility substations, data centers, 
cell phone towers, corporate headquarters, schools, universities, 
hospitals, and more. Fuel cells are able to provide distributed, clean 
primary power to fill needs when renewable power is intermittent, as 
well as improve the reliability and stability of an electric grid with 
a high penetration of renewable power generation. Fuel cell systems 
generate 24/7, clean, load-following power at close to 100% capacity 
factors. Compared to other front-of-the-meter distributed energy 
resources (DER), the combination of fuel cell high efficiency and 
extremely high-capacity factor results in the displacement of more GHG 
emissions than equivalent-sized intermittent resources.
    Hydrogen is increasingly being viewed as the first viable avenue 
for long-term and large-scale seasonal energy storage. Hydrogen energy 
storage is a process wherein the surplus of energy created by 
renewables during low energy demand periods is used to power 
electrolysis, a process in which an electrical current is passed 
through water to produce hydrogen. The hydrogen can be stored in large 
quantities for weeks or months at a time for later use in a variety of 
energy applications. The International Energy Agency predicts that 
hydrogen generated from wind will be cheaper than natural gas by 2030.
    While the fuel cell and hydrogen industry has been gaining 
significant momentum in recent years, this progress could not have been 
possible without the support and partnership from the Department of 
Energy&#x27;s fuel cell and hydrogen programs. America is currently the 
world leader in fuel cell technologies, however that gap is quickly 
tightening due to government interest abroad. 2020 saw one of the 
greatest increases of hydrogen interest across the globe, with 
countries from in Europe, Asia, North America, and South America 
releasing dedicated national hydrogen strategies along with committing 
billions of dollars to developing and deploying hydrogen and fuel 
cells. For example, Germany plans to invest =9 billion ($11 billion) 
into its hydrogen economy, and France has pledged =2 billion ($2.4 
billion). Spain, Finland, Italy, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, 
Australia, South Korea, Japan, Chile, Canada, India, and China have all 
committed to a hydrogen future through new policies or the release of 
hydrogen strategies. The European Commission&#x27;s hydrogen strategy calls 
for the installation of 6 gigawatts of renewable hydrogen electrolyzers 
by 2024, and 40 gigawatts by 2030. It is important that America 
recognizes the importance of hydrogen technologies, as other countries 
have, and massively scale up investments or we could risk ceding our 
technology leadership abroad.
    Immense progress has been made to date through the collaboration of 
industry and the DOE through HFTO. The cutting-edge research developed 
through DOE funding has led to more than 730 hydrogen and fuel cell 
patents, including more than 30 commercial technologies such as fuel 
cell catalysts, high-pressure hydrogen tanks, electrolyzers and low 
carbon hydrogen production, and fuel cell system components. DOE-funded 
research has also cut the cost of automotive fuel cells by 60% in the 
last decade, quadrupled durability to over 120,000 miles, cut 
electrolyzer stack costs by 80% since 2002. We are excited by Biden 
administration&#x27;s interest in hydrogen and our industry looks forward to 
working with DOE to on the recently announced Hydrogen Energy Earthshot 
Initiative to accelerate reductions in the cost of hydrogen.
    Further support is still needed for early, middle, and late-stage 
development, demonstration, and deployment activities to help industry 
clear the remaining technical and regulatory barriers to accelerated 
adoption of fuel cells and hydrogen energy, and to ensure the 
incorporation of these technologies into a grander clean energy plan to 
combat the climate crisis. FCHEA is grateful for the past support that 
the Senate Energy and Water Development Appropriations Subcommittee has 
given to DOE&#x27;s hydrogen and fuel cell programs. While the funding 
levels requested are a significant increase from previous years, we 
believe now is the time to double down on hydrogen and fuel cell 
technologies to launch the technology into the mainstream. It is 
crucial that hydrogen and fuel cells are adequately funded so that they 
may become an integral component of America&#x27;s climate and economic 
strategy. We urge the Subcommittee, under your bipartisan leadership, 
to continue this support with our FY 2022 appropriations request and 
ensure the long-term success of our innovative, sustainable energy 
industry. By supporting continued development fuel cell and hydrogen 
technologies, America can both mitigate the causes of climate change, 
while supporting our economic future and maintaining our nation&#x27;s 
energy technology leadership. Thank you for your consideration.

    [This statement was submitted by Morry B. Markowitz, President, 
Fuel Cell &amp; Hydrogen Energy Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the Grand Valley Water Users Association
    My name is Mark Harris. I am the General Manager of the Grand 
Valley Water Users Association in Grand Junction, Colorado. We are 
deeply involved with the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery 
Program. We are requesting your support for appropriations in the 
President&#x27;s recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of 
Reclamation, Upper Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River 
Endangered Fish Recovery Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery 
Implementation Program. The budget items and amounts requested in the 
President&#x27;s budget for these programs are described below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President &#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    We appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.

    [This statement was submitted by Mark Harris, General Manager, 
Grand Valley Water Users Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
                 Prepared Statement of Hannon Armstrong
    As a leading investor in climate solutions, including energy 
efficiency, renewable energy and other sustainable infrastructure 
projects, Hannon Armstrong respectfully urges your support for funding 
the Federal Energy Management Program (``FEMP&#x27;&#x27;), an important program 
that oversees and facilitates the implementation of Energy Savings 
Performance Contract (ESPC) and Utility Energy Service Contract (UESC) 
activities, which are currently contemplated in the Fiscal Year (FY) 
2022 Energy and Water Development Appropriations bill. We urge you to 
support an increase in funding for FEMP in FY22.
    Hannon Armstrong (NYSE: HASI) has 40 years of experience in 
sustainable infrastructure financing. We specialize in providing 
preferred or senior level capital to established sponsors and high-
credit quality obligors, such as U.S. federal, state and local 
governments, Global 1000 corporations and private developers, for 
assets that generate long-term, recurring and predictable cash flows.
    Our company provides and arranges debt and equity financing for a 
broad range energy efficiency projects that reduce energy usage or the 
cost of energy use. We often work with global energy service companies 
(ESCOs), which design and install improvements to various building 
components, including HVAC systems, lighting, energy controls, roofs, 
windows and/or building shells. We originate many of our transactions 
through programmatic finance relationships with ESCOs as well as 
renewable energy manufacturers, developers, and operators who own and 
operate renewable energy projects, including a number of U.S. utility 
companies.
    In December 2020, we announced that the company has exceeded $6 
billion in energy efficiency investments from more than 600 individual 
transactions with leading behind-the-meter energy service companies 
serving federal, state, local and commercial energy efficiency markets 
since 2000. Hannon Armstrong&#x27;s total investments in energy efficiency 
projects have an average CarbonCount(r) score of 0.38 metric tons of 
CO2 equivalent (``CO2e&#x27;&#x27;) emissions avoided annually per $1,000 
invested, as well as a WaterCount(tm) score of 658 gallons of water 
consumption avoided annually for every $1,000 invested. The estimated 
21.2 million tons of CO2e avoided emissions over 20 years is equivalent 
to the amount of CO2e emissions from 116,390 rail cars of coal, which 
would stretch from Annapolis, Md. to Kansas City, Mo. when linked end 
to end. The 36.3 billion gallons of water consumption saved by these 
investments over the same period could fill three bathtubs for every 
person in the United States.
                     the numerous benefits of espcs
    ESPCs are a highly effective public-private partnership model to 
improve building energy efficiency. In this budget-neutral approach, 
future guaranteed energy savings are used to pay the financing cost of 
facility upgrades. Federal ESPCs have been one of the most efficient 
and successful programs reducing energy use and carbon emissions while 
improving resiliency in the federal built environment. ESPCs allow 
federal agencies to procure energy savings and facility improvements 
with no up-front capital costs or special appropriations from Congress. 
Studies by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory show that, on average, 
actual cost savings exceed guaranteed savings for federal ESPC 
projects.\1\ Projects under the FEMP ESPC program reported achieving 
14.155 million MMBtu in energy savings in FY2019, outperforming 
estimates.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/
2016_savings_espcs.pdf.
    \2\ https://info.ornl.gov/sites/publications/Files/Pub150841.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    ESPCs and UESCs enable agencies to procure energy services and 
projects without relying solely on appropriated funds to replace, 
operate, and maintain aging energy-using equipment. At no added cost to 
the government, ESPCs and UESCs assist agencies and installations in 
reducing their energy intensity, saving taxpayer dollars and in many 
cases improving mission readiness. These innovative contracts also 
require the assurance of financial savings.


    ESPCs and UESCs have also resulted in the creation of thousands of 
local and un-exportable jobs. According to the Federal Performance 
Contracting Coalition (FPCC), for every $10 million of investment in 
ESPCs and UESCs an estimated 95 high paying jobs are created. 40 of 
these jobs are created in the manufacturing sector, 35 jobs are created 
with subcontractors and installers and finally, 20 of the 95 jobs 
created are with the ESCOs.
    ESPC and UESC contracts are excellent examples of the federal 
government leveraging private capital. With more than 350,000 energy-
using buildings and structures representing nearly 2.4 billion square 
feet of facilities, the federal government is our nation&#x27;s largest 
energy consumer. Federal agencies have a tremendous opportunity and an 
obligation to reduce energy and water use in their operations. 
According to the most current data from the Department of Energy, there 
are nearly $8 billion in identified energy conservation measures for 
federal agencies, which would save the government almost $800 million a 
year in energy and water-related costs. Implementing these measures 
would avoid approximately 3 million metric tons of CO2e emissions 
annually.
    ESPCs can and should be used to leverage private sector dollars--
this allows important and often mission critical projects to be 
accomplished with far less taxpayer dollars. ESPCs often have a very 
strong return on investment, as well as a host of additional benefits, 
including accelerated project timelines, reduced energy infrastructure 
costs, and low-cost financing. The budget-neutrality of ESPCs ensure 
financial stability in both the short- and long-term. Agencies should 
prioritize leveraging private sector financing to take full advantage 
of these numerous benefits, creating jobs while saving taxpayer dollars 
and improving facility performance.
    As the federal program responsible for providing services to enable 
all agencies to implement successful ESPC and UESC projects, FEMP 
provides crucial assistance, guidance, and training. We therefore 
strongly urge funding of $36 million for FEMP so it may continue its 
vital work to cut energy waste and increase efficiency across the 
federal government through the public-private partnerships required 
under ESPCs and UESCs. Of that funding, we request $2 million to 
support the Performance Contracting National Resource Center (PCNRC), a 
hub within FEMP housing all of DOE&#x27;s best practice resources and 
solutions for ESPCs. We also request $400 million for the Assisting 
Federal Facilities with Energy Conservation Technologies (AFFECT) 
program within FEMP, in alignment with President Biden&#x27;s budget 
request-as long as it continues to leverage private financing to get 
the greatest return on investment for the American taxpayer. The AFFECT 
program increases resilience and cybersecurity in Federal performance 
contracts by leveraging private capital. AFFECT grants can be used to 
help fund those energy related measures that typically have very long 
paybacks but, when included with an ESPC, can create a deep retrofit 
and enhanced resiliency for federal agencies. The Biden FY22 Budget 
request prioritizes deep retrofits under AFFECT, in accordance with 
these aims.
    The AFFECT grant program supports agency projects that spur energy 
generation, energy efficiency, and energy storage projects across the 
country. In 2020, the program distributed $11 million in grants to 16 
federal agency projects, which will lead to a total investment of over 
$439 million.\3\ The FY22 funding for FEMP would increase support of 
ESPCs, which are a cost-effective way to make much needed upgrades and 
increase resiliency of vital federal assets, including military 
facilities. FEMP&#x27;s most important effort is the coordinated and defined 
program management of ESPCs for federal agencies. FEMP staff help 
agencies use ESPCs in several ways: advising agencies on scoping, 
procurement, and performance requirements for energy conservation 
measures (ECMs); helping agencies select third-party ESCOs; finalizing 
contracting terms and project approval; and monitoring project 
implementation and performance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ https://www.energy.gov/eere/femp/2020-assisting-federal-
facilities-energy-conservation-technologies-affect-federal-agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    FEMP is at the forefront of efforts to improve federal building 
energy performance, which is accomplished in part by accessing and 
leveraging private capital in performance contracts. The additional 
private capital has been used to finance hundreds of projects across 
two dozen agencies, creating 30,000 jobs and reducing energy outlays by 
$8 billion over the next 18 years. As mentioned, the President 
requested $400 million for AFFECT via the Federal Energy Efficiency 
Fund--which could be used to leverage at least 10 dollars for every 
federal grant dollar invested--and is critical to tackling the backlog 
of needed maintenance in our federal infrastructure, while also leading 
by example and addressing climate change through supporting clean 
energy in buildings.
    FEMP is the program ma-nager for the critical ESPC contracting tool 
used by federal agencies for the implementation of ESPCs--the 
Department of Energy, Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity, Energy 
Savings Performance Contract (DOE IDIQ ESPC). These contracts have 
historically been instrumental in achieving the aforementioned energy 
and cost savings as well as the job creation outcomes for the nation. 
Since the inception of the DOE IDIQ ESPCs in 1998, 431 projects have 
been awarded and approximately $7.66 billion has been invested in 
federal energy efficiency and renewable energy improvements. These 
improvements have resulted in approximately 618.7 trillion Btu in life 
cycle energy savings and $17.53 billion in cumulative energy cost 
savings for the federal government.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ https://www.energy.gov/eere/femp/awarded-doe-idiq-energy-
savings-performance-contract-projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Fiscal year 2020 was the most successful year in the history of the 
DOE IDIQ ESPC program with a record $842 million total project 
investment which will generate $1.7 billion in energy and water savings 
for the federal government.\5\ We also urge FEMP to increase its 
support to military services seeking ESPCs for upgrades to military 
facilities across the county. One of the main reasons these 
infrastructure and resiliency upgrades remain uncompleted is lack of 
appropriated funding. Employing ESPCs to make these much-needed 
upgrades is a cost-effective way to increase the resiliency of 
important infrastructure systems and the services they provide to base 
personnel and operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ https://www.energy.gov/eere/femp/awarded-doe-idiq-energy-
savings-performance-contract-projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Again, we strongly urge a total of $36 million in funding for FEMP, 
including $2 million for the Performance Contracting National Resource 
Center, alongside $400 million for the AFFECT program--so that FEMP may 
continue its vital work as the program manager of ESPCs and the ESPC 
DOE IDIQ ESPC contract in FY2022 and beyond. We thank you for providing 
this opportunity to submit this testimony and we look forward to 
working with you.

    [This statement was submitted by Robert Johnson, Senior Vice 
President, Hannon Armstrong.]
                                 ______
                                 
        Prepared Statement of the Izaak Walton League of America
    The Izaak Walton League of America appreciates the opportunity to 
submit testimony concerning appropriations for fiscal year (FY) 2022 
for programs under the jurisdiction of the Subcommittee. The League is 
a national, nonprofit organization founded in 1922 with 40,000 members 
and 200 local chapters nationwide. Our members are committed to 
advancing common sense policies that safeguard wildlife and habitat, 
support community-based conservation, and address pressing 
environmental issues. The following pertains to programs administered 
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Missouri River Recovery Program 
construction at $30.4 million, Missouri River Recovery Program 
operations and maintenance at $5.2 million, Upper Mississippi River 
Restoration Program at $31.17 million, and the South Florida Ecosystem 
Restoration Program at $725 million).
Army Corps of Engineers, Construction and Operations and Maintenance, 
        Missouri River
            The Missouri River Recovery Program
    The League urges the Subcommittee to reject the President&#x27;s request 
of $8 million for construction for the Missouri River Recovery Program 
(MRRP) and instead appropriate $30.4 million for FY 2022 for the MRRP. 
This funding level will adequately fund the Army Corps to successfully 
implement the Missouri River Recovery Management Plan (Plan) and the 
Fish and Wildlife Mitigation Project for the Bank Stabilization and 
Navigation Project (BSNP). We ask that the funding meet the Corps 
capability level identified in the Environmental Impact Statement for 
the Plan, $30.4 million for construction and $5.2 million for 
operations and maintenance of existing projects. With this funding, the 
Corps, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), states, and other partners 
can continue important ecosystem restoration efforts that are producing 
long-term ecological and economic benefits.
    The requested increased FY 2022 funding would allow the Corps to 
fund long neglected aspects of the BSNP Fish and Wildlife Mitigation 
Project for the Missouri River. Funding for this critical effort has 
been severely lacking in recent years. Mitigation Project goals are 
falling further and further behind projections and expectations.
    The BSNP Fish and Wildlife Mitigation Project, as authorized by 
Section 601(a) of WRDA 1986 and Section 334(a) of WRDA 1999, is 
required to offset habitat loses from the Corps&#x27; ongoing maintenance 
and operation of the Missouri River System. The Fish and Wildlife 
Mitigation Project will help reduce Missouri River flooding, improve 
water quality, provide for self-sustaining fish and wildlife 
populations and increase recreation for families in the basin.
    Funding the full capability will enable the Corps to collaborate 
with a growing list of landowners willing to help reduce flood risk and 
restore critical habitat. Years of declining funding has caused the 
Corps to fall further and further behind established habitat and 
species targets identified in Congressionally mandated recovery plans. 
Over 100,000 acres of previously authorized mitigation that would build 
resiliency to flooding and benefit fish and wildlife has not been 
secured due to insufficient appropriations for the MRRP. Willing 
landowners are anxiously waiting on the Corps to fulfill its BSNP 
Mitigation obligations.
    With adequate funding, habitat restoration efforts could include 
reconnecting portions of the river to floodplain wetlands, bottomland 
forests, and native prairies. This will increase the river&#x27;s capacity 
and resiliency and increase the ability to capture carbon and reduce 
the movement of nutrients to the Gulf of Mexico. These actions will 
also reduce the river&#x27;s stage and velocity during high flows, while 
creating much needed slow and slack water habitat for the pallid and 
other fish species during other times of year.
    In 2011, the Missouri Department of Conservation and the Nebraska 
Game and Parks Commission found recreational spending provides $68 
million in annual economic impact to communities along the Missouri 
River from Yankton, South Dakota to St. Louis, Missouri. In addition to 
the economic boost from tourism, restoration projects support job 
creation throughout the entire region. The Corps contracts with local 
construction companies, creating jobs, and injecting dollars into local 
economies through purchases of materials, fuel, food and lodging. With 
the funding requested, the Corps could readily implement more of these 
important restoration projects.
Army Corps of Engineers, Construction, Upper Mississippi River
            Upper Mississippi River Restoration Program
    The League is an active and long-time proponent of restoring the 
Upper Mississippi River (UMR) ecosystem. We have supported the Upper 
Mississippi River Restoration (subaccount for the Environmental 
Management Program) since its inception and continue to support this 
vital restoration initiative. We urge the Subcommittee to continue to 
provide $33.17 million for the UMRR-EMP as provided in the FY 2021 
omnibus.
    The Upper Mississippi River is one of the most complex ecosystems 
on earth. It provides habitat for 50 species of mammals, 45 species of 
reptiles and amphibians, 37 species of mussels, and 241 species of 
fish. The need for ecosystem restoration is unquestionable. As the 
Corps correctly stated in its study of navigation expansion, this 
ecosystem is ``significantly altered, is currently degraded, and is 
expected to get worse.&#x27;&#x27; Researchers from the National Academy of 
Sciences have determined that river habitat is disappearing faster than 
it can be replaced through existing programs such as the Upper 
Mississippi River Restoration (UMRR) program, which was authorized at 
$33.2 million annually by Congress in 1999. Since its inception, the 
UMRR has restored critical fish and wildlife habitat on more than 
100,000 acres across Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois, and 
Missouri. The UMRR is also able to deliver the restoration of these 
acres at the average cost of $3,000 per acre, an impressively low cost.
    Our nation relies on a healthy Mississippi River for commerce, 
recreation, drinking water, food, and generation of electricity. More 
than 12 million people annually recreate on and along the Upper 
Mississippi River spending $1.2 billion and supporting 18,000 jobs. 
More people recreate on the Upper Mississippi annually than visit 
Yellowstone National Park. Each of the more than 50 completed 
restoration projects generates half of its labor from local workers 
living near the sites. During construction, each of these projects 
infuses an average of $750,000 into the local economies and small 
towns.
Army Corps of Engineers, Construction, South Florida Ecosystem 
        Restoration
    The League requests the Subcommittee reject the President&#x27;s request 
for $350 million and appropriate $725 million for construction for the 
South Florida Ecosystem Restoration (SFER) for FY 2022 as requested by 
Florida Congressional delegation, Florida state officials, and the 
Everglades conservation community. This request prioritizes funds 
needed now to adequately restore the Everglades, reduce polluted 
discharges from Lake Okeechobee, and protect drinking water for 8 
million Americans living in Florida.
    This funding will advance important restoration projects under the 
Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP), including the 
critical Everglades-Agricultural Area Reservoir recently authorized in 
WRDA 2018. The reservoir would allow water to flow south from Lake 
Okeechobee and be stored and treated before flowing into Everglades 
National Park and Florida Bay, greatly reducing the need for the Army 
Corps to release polluted lake water into the Caloosahatchee and St. 
Lucie Rivers, which can lead to harmful algal blooms on Florida&#x27;s Gulf 
and Atlantic coasts. Adequately funding SFER would also allow the Army 
Corps to complete other CERP projects vital to restoration of the 
Everglades, including Picayune Strand Restoration, Broward County Water 
Preserve Area, Biscayne Bay Coastal Wetlands, and Indian River Lagoon-
South.
    Economic benefits that would come from restoration of the 
Everglades are astronomical. Gains in biodiversity, groundwater 
purification and aquifer storage, increasing property values, park 
visitation, carbon sequestration, and improved fish and wildlife 
habitat that would come from a full restoration of the Everglades, as 
described in the CERP, would drive an economic increase of $46.5 
billion. Even with a price tag of $11 billion, much of which will be 
borne by non-federal partners, restoration of the Everglades represents 
an impressive benefit to cost ratio greater than 4.00.
    The Izaak Walton League appreciates the opportunity to testify 
about these important issues.

    [This statement was submitted by Jared Mott, Conservation Director, 
Izaak 
Walton League of America.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of Methane Action and Remineralize the Earth
    Madam Chair et al.,
    Yesterday, the world-renowned former science advisor to the U.K., 
Sir David King of Cambridge University, declared that he believes we 
have five years left to solve the climate crisis. He announced the 
formation of a new Climate Crisis Advisory Group to help reduce 
emissions, remove greenhouse gases already emitted and restore the 
climate to truly healthy temperatures and functioning. See, https://
www.businessgreen.com/news/4033355/reduce-remove-repair-climate-crisis-
advisory-group-sketches-climate-priorities.
    In April Sir David led a group of 31 scientists in writing a letter 
in advance of the White House Climate Summit declaring that governments 
need to expedite the reduction of emissions, the deployment of methods 
of removing ambient methane and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) and the 
development of governance capable of ensuring the safe and effective 
use of those methods. (See, MethaneAction.org).\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Today we learned that a Penn State research team has shown that 
oil and gas methane emissions are larger than EPA inventory values by 
48% to 76%. (https://phys.org/news/2021-06-ethane-proxies-methane-oil-
gas.html).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Our testimony focuses primarily on how this Subcommittee can 
expedite the research and development of the technologies that can buy 
us time as we seek to restore safe levels of GHGs including 
CO2 below 300 ppm and methane below .8 ppm. Peer reviewed 
science and on-going laboratory tests indicate we can achieve that 
methane goal within this decade buying time to deal with the longer-
term problem of CO2. We filed complementary testimony on the 
24th with the Interior-EPA Subcommittee and recommend that you compare 
notes with them in order to ensure the best fit for each Subcommittee 
and recommendation that you find useful. For example, some of the work 
we have recommended that the EPA direct could be initiated by ARPA-E 
but (1) not all are energy related as methane and other GHGs have other 
sources and sinks, and (2) some of the research would be done more 
efficiently in some cases with non-U.S. principal investigators who are 
already, with too little funding, working on these approaches, and (3) 
the overall program should in any case be geared for both international 
cooperation and policy coordination. So we will not repeat those 
requests here. Our testimony will largely be in the legislative 
language we recommend from here on:

(I) Reducing emissions and concentrations of climate forcing agents.
    In order to reduce greenhouse gases and other climate forcing 
agents to historically healthy levels as soon as possible, the 
Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Secretaries of Agriculture, 
the Interior, State and Treasury, the Administrator of USAID, the Chief 
Executive Officers of the Millennium Challenge Corporation and the U.S. 
International Development Finance Corporation and the Export Import 
Bank, using funds appropriated for their other relevant programs as 
well as those appropriated for this Title, shall, as directed below:

    (A) Review existing and pending patents for methods of removing 
        climate forcing agents and limiting the emissions thereof, and 
        grants and contracts for the development of such technologies 
        made by the U.S. and other governments, including but not 
        limited to the United Kingdom, and foundations and ensure, in 
        consultation and cooperation with the Special Envoy and 
        Domestic Advisor on Climate Change and the appropriate 
        departments and agencies, including but not limited to the 
        Chair of the Council on Environmental Quality, and foreign and 
        international governments, that the research, development, and 
        deployment of such methods is completed and advanced each year 
        to the extent practicable, and incorporated in their actions, 
        including but not limited to their foreign assistance, 
        intergovernmental cooperation, and international finance 
        programs, and provisions. The Secretary shall complete the 
        steps of paragraph (A) and its subparagraphs by July 1, 2022 
        unless otherwise noted in the schedule set forth as follows:

      (i) Develop an interagency agreement on GHG Drawdown Research, 
            Development and Deployment to collaborate with the 
            Administrator of the EPA and the Commandant of the Coast 
            Guard, as the U.S. liaison to the International Maritime 
            Organization, on research, development, assessment and 
            trials of methods of methane oxidation and catalysis for 
            near source and ambient removal and measure co-benefits 
            including removing other pollutants such as Nitrous Oxide, 
            CO2, soot and preventing ground level ozone. 
            (See Interior-EPA testimony of Methane Action and RTE for 
            research projects.)

      (ii) Surface-based Photocatalytic Enhanced Methane Oxidation 
            (SPEMO). In cooperation with the Environmental Protection 
            Agency and the Secretary of State and the Administrator of 
            USAID the Secretary of Energy shall contract for three 
            years of research and development of surface-based 
            photocatalytic enhanced methane oxidation (SPEMO) to: (I) 
            Lower methane emissions from coal mines, oil wells and 
            animal farms, to ensure that the CH4 concentration from 
            ventilated air is less than 1.7 ppm by volume; and (II) 
            Apply photocatalytic paint to buildings, rooftops, 
            photovoltaic panels, or in a ventilated conduit to reduce 
            methane in the general atmosphere as a complement to 
            commercial photocatalytic paints and coatings already being 
            used because of their self-cleaning property and ability to 
            reduce urban pollution such as nitrogen oxides and volatile 
            organic compounds. At $1,000,000, or one third of that from 
            each of three agencies, per year for a total contract in 
            FY2022 for (I) and (II) of: $3,000,000

    (B) Integrate GHG removal in Development Assistance and Trade.

    (1) The Secretary of Energy, Directors of the DOE Office of Fossil 
Energy and Carbon Management and the Advanced Research Projects Agency-
E, the Chief Engineer of the USACE and the Commissioner of the Bureau 
of Reclamation shall assist the U.S. Customs and Border Protection, and 
the Administrator of US EPA, in calculating the difference between the 
climate forcing agents emitted in the production of fuels, 
hydroelectric power of different types, other energy sources, wetlands 
management (e.g. draining or re-watering) and the production of the 
goods and services in other countries and those emitted in the United 
States, the extent to which other countries remove emitted GHGs and the 
economic costs thereof and inform U.S. Trade Representative, the 
Secretary of Commerce by June 1, 2022 of the results of those 
calculations so that they may ensure that those receiving assistance in 
programs under their jurisdiction or control or exporting goods or 
services to the United States will limit and sequester, oxidize or 
otherwise remove the climate forcing agents or the carbon dioxide 
equivalent thereof to the extent practicable currently and endow a fund 
for the future reclamation of such agents as technical or natural 
capacities for so doing are available.

    (2) Assist the U.S. Customs and Border Protection, and the 
Administrator of US EPA, and the U.S. Trade Representative and the 
Secretary of Commerce, in calculating by June 1, 2022 tariff and trade 
adjustments that would internalize the avoided costs and externalities 
that exceed those of comparable production in the United States; so 
that they are in a position to impose tariffs and embargoes accordingly 
by September 1, 2022.

    (C) Ensure Global Governance of GHG Removal Methods. Beginning no 
        later than one week after the date of enactment and continuing 
        thereafter, the Secretary shall assist the Secretary of State, 
        the Administrator of the EPA and the US Trade Representative, 
        in consultation with the Special Envoy for Climate Change, the 
        Commandant of the Coast Guard and other agencies participating 
        in the affected U.S. delegations, in proposing and pursuing 
        resolutions and agreements for supporting the proper assessment 
        and deployment and governance of methods of reducing the 
        atmospheric presence of climate forcing agents to historic 
        healthy levels; of assessing the effects thereof to ensure the 
        sufficient, safe and proper use of technologies for reducing 
        the emissions of carbon dioxide, methane, CFCs, HFCs, black 
        soot and other climate forcing agents or the climate forcing 
        impact of them; and for actively removing such agents from the 
        atmosphere, within or apart from existing international 
        agreements in a manner that is complementary to their 
        objectives and not preemptive of conservation and restoration 
        efforts. Those agreements shall include but not be limited to 
        the UNFCCC and its protocols and accords, the London Convention 
        on Marine Pollution (via the International Maritime 
        Organization), the Vienna Convention on the Protection of the 
        Ozone Layer and its protocols, UNECE Convention on Long-range 
        Transboundary Air Pollution, the Convention on Migratory 
        Species, the Convention on Biological Diversity and other 
        conservation agreements, the major international trade 
        agreements, and the United Nations, and UNEP, FAO, UNDP and any 
        other relevant subsidiary bodies; $3,000,000

    (D) Report on Plans. The Secretary of Energy in cooperation with 
        the Secretary of State shall form a Committee on Climate 
        Restoration comprised of the Secretaries and agency heads 
        tasked under this Title to report as directed in subsections 
        (D) and (E) to the Committees of jurisdiction within ninety 
        days of enactment on their training programs and plans for 
        cooperating with the United Nations, the Organization for 
        Economic Cooperation and Development and their subsidiary 
        bodies, other interested nation states in implementing 
        paragraphs (A)-(D) and for incorporating these elements in 
        their work and measuring the success of their implementation; 
        and

    (E) Report on Results. Within 180 days of enactment and annually 
        thereafter the Committee on Climate Restoration shall report to 
        the Secretaries and Administrators listed in Section I, and the 
        Congressional Committees of jurisdiction, on their progress and 
        report any requests and suggestions for expediting the 
        deployment of methods found to be effective in light of their 
        direct and indirect costs and co-benefits as informed in more 
        detail every two years by the assessments produced by those 
        agencies and other competent authorities. The Secretary shall 
        ensure that the report and plan are produced with the 
        cooperation of appropriate government agencies, including but 
        not limited to the EPA, EIA, USAID and those included elsewhere 
        in this Section. The Secretary shall further ensure that 
        authors include a range of conservation biology, oceanic, 
        agronomy and atmospheric scientists, among others, as well as 
        economists, engineers, policy makers, regulatory experts. The 
        federal agencies should also provide a companion report 
        discussing their efforts, progress and challenges. The 
        Secretary is directed to fund from his regular budget a report 
        updating the initial report every 2 years.
    For this Title in addition to the amounts specified above: 
$8,000,000
II. Integrating Climate Restoration across the Government.
    The program requirements of these Sections are to be integrated 
into the regular order of business and carried out within the budget 
authorities and amounts appropriated for each of the affected agencies 
independent of further appropriations, this section however, hereby 
also provides such authorization as may be necessary through FY2028 as 
well as appropriations for FY2022.
                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of the Metropolitan Water District of Southern 
                               California
    The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California 
(Metropolitan) encourages the Subcommittee&#x27;s support for fiscal year 
2022 federal funding of $10.7 million for the U.S. Bureau of 
Reclamation&#x27;s (Reclamation) Colorado River Basin Salinity Control 
Program (Salinity Control Program), Title II--Basinwide Program to 
prevent further degradation of Colorado River water quality and 
increased economic damages.
    The salt concentration in the Colorado River causes an estimated 
$354 million in quantifiable damages to water users each year. While 
this figure is significant, had it not been for the efforts of the 
Salinity Control Program, damages would be much higher. Salinity 
Control Program actions have reduced the salinity of Colorado River 
water at key locations over 90 milligrams per liter (mg/L) from what 
they would have been without the actions. Modeling by Reclamation 
indicates that quantifiable damages could rise to approximately $671 
million by the year 2040 without continuation of the program.
    Metropolitan is the regional water supplier for most of urban 
Southern California, providing supplemental water to retail agencies 
that serve approximately 19 million people.
    Water imported via the Colorado River Aqueduct has the highest 
salinity level of all of Metropolitan&#x27;s sources of supply, averaging 
around 630 mg/L since 1976. This salinity level causes economic damages 
to all sectors. For example, high salinity has the following impacts:
  --It reduces the useful life of water heaters, faucets, garbage 
        disposals, clothes washers, and dishwashers, and increases use 
        of water softeners in the household sector;
  --It increases the cost of cooling operations, the need for and cost 
        of water softening, and decreases equipment service life in the 
        commercial sector;
  --It increases water use, the cost of water treatment, and sewer fees 
        in the industrial sector;
  --It decreases the life of treatment facilities and pipelines in the 
        utility sector;
  --It increases the cost of desalination and brine disposal for 
        recycled water in the municipal sector;
  --It reduces the yield of salt sensitive crops and increases water 
        use for leaching in the agricultural sector;
  --It increases desalination and brine disposal costs due to 
        accumulation of salts in groundwater basins, and reduces 
        opportunities for water recycling due to groundwater quality 
        deterioration;
  --It reduces the ability to replenish groundwater in basins with 
        relatively low salinity standards;
  --It reduces the ability to reclaim and reuse water due to high 
        salinities in the water delivered to water treatment and 
        reclamation facilities; and
  --It makes it more difficult to meet wastewater discharge 
        requirements to comply with National Pollutant Discharge 
        Elimination System permit terms and conditions.
    There has been concern over salinity levels in the Colorado River 
for many years. To address the concern, the International Boundary and 
Water Commission signed Minute No. 242, Permanent and Definitive 
Solution to the International Problem of the Salinity of the Colorado 
River in 1973, and the President signed the Colorado River Basin 
Salinity Control Act of 1974 (Act) into law. Title I of the Act deals 
with the U.S. commitment to the quality of waters being delivered to 
Mexico. Title II of the Act deals with improving the quality of the 
water delivered to users in the United States. This testimony deals 
specifically with Title II efforts. To further foster interstate 
cooperation and coordinate the Colorado River Basin states&#x27; efforts on 
salinity control, the seven Basin states formed the Colorado River 
Basin Salinity Control Forum.
    The Forum is charged with reviewing the Colorado River&#x27;s water 
quality standards for salinity every three years. In so doing, it 
adopts a Plan of Implementation consistent with these standards. The 
level of appropriation requested in this testimony is in keeping with 
the adopted Plan of Implementation, which is to be implemented by 
Reclamation, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (NRCS).
    In implementing the Act, Congress recognized that most of the salt 
load in the Colorado River originates from federally owned lands. The 
majority of land within the Colorado River Basin is federally owned and 
administered. The salts in the Colorado River Basin are naturally-
occurring and pervasive, mostly resulting from saline sediments in the 
Basin that were deposited in prehistoric marine environments. They are 
easily eroded, dissolved, and transported into the river system, and 
enter the River through both natural and anthropogenic processes. The 
Salinity Control Program reduces salinity by preventing salts from 
dissolving and mixing with the River&#x27;s flow. Irrigation improvements 
(sprinklers, gated pipe, lined canals) and vegetation management reduce 
the amount of salt transported to the Colorado River. Point sources 
such as saline springs are also controlled.
    The Salinity Control Program benefits Lower Basin water users, 
hundreds of miles downstream from salt sources in the Upper Basin, 
through reduced salinity of Colorado River water.
    The Salinity Control Program, as set forth in the Act, also 
benefits the Upper Colorado River Basin water users through more 
efficient water management and increased crop production, and benefits 
local economies through construction contracts and environmental 
enhancements.
    In the early years of the program, Reclamation implemented salinity 
control through large projects which were funded with specific line 
item amounts. In 1995, Congress amended the Act and created 
Reclamation&#x27;s Basinwide Program. Under this program, Reclamation funds 
competitive proposals for projects that will decrease the salt load to 
the Colorado River.
    Most of the proposals target off-farm irrigation distribution 
systems such as canals and laterals. The lining or piping of canals and 
laterals prevents leakage into the groundwater and the dissolution and 
transportation of salts to the Colorado River and its tributaries.
    The requested funding level of $10.7 million is required to keep 
the Basinwide Program on pace with the overall Salinity Control Program 
implementation needs. These federal dollars will be augmented by state 
cost sharing of 30 percent and by an additional 25 percent provided by 
the agricultural producers with whom the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
contracts for implementation of salinity control measures.
    Over the past years, the Salinity Control Program has proven to be 
a cost-effective approach to mitigating the impacts of increased 
salinity in the Colorado River. Adequate federal funding of this 
important program is essential. Metropolitan urges the Subcommittee to 
fund the Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s Salinity Control Program, Title II--
Basinwide Program for fiscal year 2022 in the amount of $10.7 million. 
This modest investment in source control pays dividends in improved 
drinking water quality to nearly 40 million Americans.

    [This statement was submitted by Jeffrey Kightlinger, General 
Manager, 
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California.]
                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of the Mid-West Electric Consumers Association
    Chair Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and members of the 
Subcommittee, I am Jim B. Horan, Executive Director of the Mid-West 
Electric Consumers Association (Mid-West). Mid-West represents the 
interests of over 300 consumer-owned utilities across the Upper Great 
Plains that purchase power from the federal hydroelectric generators 
that are part of the Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin Program. That power is 
marketed by the Western Area Power Administration (WAPA), an agency of 
the U.S. Department of Energy, and is sold to Mid-West Members in the 
states of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, South Dakota, and Wyoming. Mid-West&#x27;s members rely on this 
cost-based, renewable, federal hydroelectric power for a significant 
portion of their power supply requirements.
    Mid-West requests that the Subcommittee provide the full funding 
for Purchase Power and Wheeling (PP&amp;W) authority requested by WAPA in 
the FY 2022 budget request. Mid-West also supports the continued use of 
``net-zero&#x27;&#x27; for annual expenses and the public partnership financing 
that has worked so successfully in the Pick-Sloan Region for over 20 
years.
                      purchase power and wheeling
    The PP&amp;W authority is necessary for WAPA to fulfill its contractual 
obligations to deliver firm power to Mid-West&#x27;s members and other WAPA 
customers, including federal and state agencies and Native American 
Tribes. These funds can only be used for PP&amp;W costs and they are 
available until expended. While WAPA may not always spend the full PP&amp;W 
appropriation in every year, a severe and prolonged drought can cause 
WAPA to incur PP&amp;W costs that exceed their available funding. In that 
event, WAPA must use cash from other planned expenditures, including 
repaying customer advances for the rehabilitation of federal assets. 
This disruption to asset rehabilitation midstream can cause 
significantly higher costs due to contractor work stoppages and 
restarts, interest that accrues on money already spent on the project, 
replacement power due to asset outages, etc.
    The PP&amp;W budget is prepared approximately two years in advance of 
the fiscal year. Each legislated project for which WAPA markets and 
transmits power has unique power production and marketing 
characteristics, which results in differing methods to budget for 
purchase power. For the Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin Program--Eastern 
Division, WAPA staff look at the last 10-11 years of rolling hydrologic 
conditions, which include a multi-year drought, and averages the 5 
median years, eliminating the other 6-7 higher and lower water years.
    Using the hydrologic data, WAPA staff then prepare a conservative 
power price forecast for the period. The combination of forecasted 
water conditions, consequent purchase power and wheeling volumes, and 
the power price forecast yield the estimate of PP&amp;W costs over the 
forecast period.
    It is important to note, however, that a drought with worse 
hydrologic conditions than any of the years included in the study will 
likely yield PP&amp;W costs significantly above what is forecast. Mid-West 
is committed to working with the Subcommittee staff and the 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) to resolve any remaining issues 
associated with the methodology involving PP&amp;W. We are very concerned 
that CBO changed a two decades-old agreement that PP&amp;W appropriations 
would not score against the federal deficit. Despite the fact that all 
PP&amp;W expenditures are paid by the WAPA customers (Mid-West member-
utilities), CBO still proposed to score these expenditures. We hope any 
lingering issues can be resolved. This is very important to the 
customer-owners of the region, since federal cost-based hydropower is 
the life-blood of the regional economy and key to maintaining energy 
affordability.
                               conclusion
    The Subcommittee&#x27;s longstanding support of the federal power 
program is greatly appreciated, and we thank you for your consideration 
of this testimony. We stand ready to respond to any questions.

    [This statement was submitted by Jim B. Horan, Executive Director, 
Mid-West Electric Consumers Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
              Prepared Statement of the Mni Wiconi Project
1. FY 2022 OMR Request
    The Mni Wiconi Project respectfully requests $ 45.080 million in 
appropriations for operation, maintenance and replacement (OMR) 
activities in FY 2021, including $1.997 million \1\ for the Bureau of 
Reclamation (Reclamation). The OMR request includes $ 21.6 million for 
necessary Coreline storage towers, crossing, and pump station. 
Additionally, the OSRWSS Core needs $38 million for South Core Line 
(Phase V) Replacement (see Section 2). Report language is also 
requested.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ This testimony uses figures provided by Reclamation for its 
FY21 work plan. We applied 2.3% inflation to those figures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    OMR funds will be used as summarized in Table 1 by the Oglala Sioux 
Rural Water Supply System (OSRWSS), Rosebud Sioux Rural Water System 
(RSRWS), and Lower Brule Sioux Rural Water System (LBSRWS).

                                                     TABLE 1
                                           MNI WICONI PROJECT SPONSOR
                                                   AGENCY: BOR
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             OSRWSS
                                  ---------------------------    RSRWS        LBSRWS    Reclamation     TOTAL
                                     Coreline   Distribution
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of Employees..............           17            33           17           13            8           88
Labor and Fringe Benefits........   $1,372,027    $2,053,402     $927,271     $972,800   $1,003,563   $6,329,063
Labor Overhead Costs.............      626,879       831,628  ...........      192,700      409,200    2,060,407
Non-Labor Costs
    Electricity/Natural Gas/           650,000       753,239      211,160      135,800      258,819    2,009,018
     Propane.....................
    Telephone/Communications.....       40,000        50,499       23,500       33,900  ...........      147,899
    Water Treatment Chemicals/         400,000       236,050       30,000      104,000  ...........      770,050
     Supplies....................
    Wells, Pumps, Motors &amp;             590,000        85,933       82,500      101,500  ...........      859,933
     Replacement.................
    Water Testing................      120,000        31,827       10,000  ...........  ...........      161,827
    Vehicle OMR..................       83,000       290,687       78,000       91,700       18,414      561,801
    Water Service Providers......  ...........  ............      250,500  ...........  ...........      250,500
    Travel-Training..............       60,000        90,177        8,000       32,900       25,575      216,652
    Other........................      257,000        92,297      318,729      199,200      281,325    1,148,551
 
Extraordinary Replacements
    Meter vault, fuel tank &amp;       ...........  ............  ...........      150,000  ...........      150,000
     security upgrades...........
    Increase Capacity of           ...........  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........
     Reservoir (New).............
    GPS/GIS......................  ...........       100,000  ...........       25,000  ...........      125,000
    Zebra Mussel Infestation.....  ...........  ............  ...........      200,000  ...........      200,000
    CB #4-6, Electrical/Generator  ...........       200,000  ...........  ...........  ...........      200,000
    Replace #5 Reservoir 1 MG....  ...........     3,000,000  ...........  ...........  ...........    3,000,000
    Increase Pipe Size:8&quot; to 12    ...........     2,500,000  ...........  ...........  ...........    2,500,000
     (Sharps to Rockyford--15 mi)
    Replace Sharps East            ...........     2,000,000  ...........  ...........  ...........    2,000,000
     Reservoir:1 MG..............
 
Existing Community Transfer
    Manderson OM&amp;R...............  ...........        25,000  ...........  ...........  ...........       25,000
    Oglala North OM&amp;R............  ...........        40,000  ...........  ...........  ...........       40,000
    Sharps Corner OM&amp;R...........  ...........        25,000  ...........  ...........  ...........       25,000
 
Priority Community System
 Upgrades
    Production Well Replacements.  ...........  ............      700,000  ...........  ...........      700,000
 
Reservoir Upgrades/Projects
    South Core Reservoir 1.......    5,000,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........    5,000,000
    South Core Reservoir 2.......    5,000,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........    5,000,000
    South Core Reservoir 4.......    6,000,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........    6,000,000
    White River Bore Crossing....    3,800,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........    3,800,000
    High Service Pump Station VFD    1,800,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........    1,800,000
                                  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      TOTAL......................  $25,798,906   $12,405,738   $2,639,660   $2,239,500   $1,996,896  $45,080,700
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The OSRWSS Core System is the heart of the Mni Wiconi Project and 
serves the three Indian Reservations and the West River/Lyman-Jones 
Rural Water System (WRLJ) in 7 off-reservation counties covering 
southwestern South Dakota with a design capacity of 52,000 people. The 
Project now serves 41,250. Public Law 100-516, as amended, our 
authorizing legislation, found that:

      ...the United States has a trust responsibility to ensure that 
        adequate and safe water supplies are available to meet the 
        economic, environmental, water supply, and public health needs 
        of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, Rosebud Indian 
        Reservation and Lower Brule Indian Reservation...
    The request as presented in Table 1 will meet the purposes of the 
Act. Appropriation by Congress of adequate funds will fulfill the 
fiduciary responsibilities of the United States as articulated in the 
Act.
    The Project has been treating and delivering more water each year 
from the OSRWSS Water Treatment Plant near Fort Pierre. The population 
will continue to grow within the service area and will reach the design 
population late in the next decade. The OMR budget must be adequate to 
(1) keep pace with the system and its growing population and (2) 
protect and preserve the $470 million investment held by the United 
States in trust for the Tribes and by WRLJ. Funds are needed to 
properly operate and maintain the infrastructure.
    We appreciate the President&#x27;s focus on improving critical water 
infrastructure in his Discretionary Request and await his specific 
requested funding level for the Mni Wiconi Project. However, we remind 
you of the Project&#x27;s overall needs, including Coreline storage towers 
and OMR for community systems when they are transferred into the 
Project, along with the actual costs of the upgrade work. We also 
remind you that the oversight budget decreases funds for routine 
maintenance and extraordinary replacements as referenced in Section 7.
2. Coreline Storage Towers, Crossing, and Phase V Project/Existing 
        Community Transfers/Extraordinary Replacements
    Included in Table 1 is $21.6 million for OSRWSS Coreline Storage 
Towers, a crossing and pump station replacement. The OSRWSS needs to 
build these towers on the Coreline for added storage. They are 
necessary for the Project to function properly in scenarios when all 
Project Sponsors are pulling 100% of their allocations. The Coreline 
needs $16 million for these towers. The Coreline also needs $ 3.8 
million to replace the White River Coreline crossing because there is a 
leak in the steel pipe under the river that is growing in size. This 
crossing is essential for the Pine Ridge Reservation and surrounding 
area south of the White River crossing. It also needs $1.8 million for 
the High Service Pump Station VFD Project.
    Not included in Table 1 for the OMR request, but a critical need 
for the OSRWSS Core is the South Core Replacement (Phase V) Project, 
which will move the lines around the City of Ft. Pierre to address 
recurrent leaks in the area. Project costs are estimated at $38 
million.
    Annual budgeting by the Administration must reflect: (1) increases 
in water deliveries as project population was added between 2013 and 
2015 with no corresponding increase in funding; (2) aging facilities in 
need of maintenance and replacement (since start of construction in 
1994 and through end of construction in FY 2015); and (3) 40 existing 
communities that must be transferred to the respective Indian rural 
water systems. It is critical that Project features not fall into 
disrepair and that sufficient funds are available for the OMR of 
existing community systems that are scheduled for inclusion in the 
Project in FY 2022 (or were transferred earlier). Funding is also 
needed for the actual upgrade work, costs for which total in the tens 
of millions for the Indian Project Sponsors. We also ask the 
Subcommittee to be mindful of what Reclamation calls ``extra-ordinary 
replacements,&#x27;&#x27; which are actually necessary and routine when pumps, 
water treatment equipment, pipelines, and other facilities fail and 
require replacement to continue operations.
    The Mni Wiconi Project should be a shiny, new project that stands 
out as a beacon of modern technology. It provides under-privileged 
communities with safe and adequate drinking water of the highest 
quality and to improve the health and well-being of a low-income 
population, purposes that have been frustrated by inadequate attention 
to infrastructure maintenance.
    It is important to remember that for OMR activities, the Indian 
projects are left with the appropriated figure minus the approximate $2 
million that Reclamation takes for oversight. The reduced amount does 
not account for the needed storage towers, crossing replacement, the 
community upgrade work, any additional community system transfers, or 
unexpected extraordinary replacements.
    The Promise Zone designation for the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation 
was announced in April 2015. It focused on developing solutions to 
infrastructure challenges and the necessary resources to upgrade 
existing community systems, among other things, to revitalize the 
region. The request in Table 1 is consistent with the Promise Zone 
designation (and last Administration&#x27;s Opportunity Zone designation), 
and underscores the need for OMR funding for routine maintenance, 
``extra-ordinary&#x27;&#x27; replacements and existing community systems 
following transfer.
    The need is the same on the Rosebud and Lower Brule Indian 
Reservations. Adequate funding for all activities, including community 
water systems that are transferred, is a necessity for the three Indian 
rural water systems in the Mni Wiconi Project. The following report 
language is requested (see previous Congresses for similarity):
    Mni Wiconi Project, South Dakota.-Reclamation is directed to 
continue working with the Tribes and relevant Federal agencies, such as 
the Department of Agriculture, the Environmental Protection Agency, the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Indian Health Service, and the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development to coordinate use of all existing 
authorities and funding sources to finish needed community system 
upgrades and connections, as well as any transfers of those systems, as 
quickly as possible. The Administration is encouraged to include 
appropriate funding for transferred community systems in future budget 
requests. (House Report 114-532, FY 2017)
    Reclamation&#x27;s annual budget requests properly included the transfer 
of existing community systems and responsibility for operation and 
maintenance. The budget needs to reflect those transfers:

      ...The project consists of new systems to be constructed, as well 
        as 40 existing Mni Wiconi community systems. Responsibilities 
        of the Secretary under the Act include the operation and 
        maintenance of existing water systems and appurtenant 
        facilities on the Pine Ridge, Rosebud, and Lower Brule Indian 
        Reservations. (FY 2012-18 Budget Justifications, p. GPR-49)
    Reclamation and other federal agencies are now assisting the Tribes 
with a pathway for funding transfers and future OMR activities for the 
40 existing community systems as they become part of the Project and 
eligible for funding. It is crucial that these efforts continue. OMR 
funding is needed for communities that were upgraded and will be 
transferred (or have been transferred) to the Project.
3. OSRWSS Regional Core Facilities
    The staff of the OSRWSS core system includes 17 employees. The 
staff operates and maintains the 14 million gallon per day regional 
water treatment plant, 203 miles of main transmission pipeline from 12 
inches to 27 inches in diameter, nine major pumping stations (4 
Megawatt total capacity), nine reservoirs (4.2 million gallons of 
capacity) and supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system, 
necessary to deliver safe and adequate drinking water to the service 
areas of OSRWSS, RSRWS, LRSRWS and WRLJ. Again, the Core Facilities 
need an additional three new Coreline storage towers, a crossing 
replacement, and pump station project at a cost of $21.6 million. The 
OSRWSS Core also needs $38 million for the South Core Line Replacement 
(Phase V) Project.
4. OSRWSS Distribution on Pine Ridge Indian Reservation
    The OSRWSS Distribution&#x27;s 33 employees are responsible for 
maintaining 760 miles of PVC water mains and service lines, 30 high 
production water wells, 33 booster pumps and treatment stations, 38 
water storage reservoirs, and 2,206 metered residences. The water 
system has been designed and constructed over a 24-year period, and 
services a total population of 21,510 residents on the Pine Ridge 
reservation. The construction of the water system is now complete and 
valued in excess of $100 million, although 20 additional community 
system upgrades are still pending. To operate and maintain our water 
system has become a challenge. The core system east of Kyle has 4 
reservoirs which have a total of 520,000 gallons of storage, this 
equates to only enough for less than 6 hours of storage in emergency 
situations. Table 1 shows a proposed 1-million-gallon reservoir to be 
constructed adjacent to Reservoir #5 which is near the reservation 
boundary north of Wanblee, SD. This added reservoir should increase our 
storage to more than 24-hours. In preparation for the projected South 
Unit development, Table 1 also proposes increasing the existing 8&#x27;&#x27; 
waterline to a 12&#x27;&#x27; line over the 15 mile stretch from Sharps to the 
Rockyford Hwy 27/Hwy 2 Intersection, and a proposed 1 million-gallon 
reservoir to be constructed adjacent to the Sharps East Reservoir.
5. Rosebud Sioux Rural Water System (RSRWS)
    The staff of RSRWS or Sicangu Mni Wiconi will total 17 full-time 
employees in FY 2021. The staff operates and maintains 425 miles of 
mainline, 15 major pumping stations, 20 water storage reservoirs, 9 
supply wells with two associated chlorination facilities, and SCADA 
system. A new production well is still needed for Rosebud Rural Water 
System due to decreased production and water supply. A previous RAX 
project request for a new production well was proposed and denied. 
Asset management indicates renovations are needed at some of the oldest 
constructed facilities in the project. A few RAX requests for system 
renovations have been submitted and some approved. The RSRWS budget 
also includes water service contracts with the City of Mission and 
Tripp County Water Users District (TCWUD) and others in the secondary 
service area at a total cost of $250,500 which reflects a reduction due 
less pumping for the Mission system. In 1995 the citizens of Mission 
voted to transfer their municipal system to the Mni Wiconi Project and 
in 2003 a final agreement between the Tribe, City of Mission and 
Reclamation was consummated and the former municipal system is now held 
in trust for the Tribe as part of the RSRWS. The inclusion and OMR of 
the Mission system are authorized by Section 3A (a) (8) of the Mni 
Wiconi Project Act, as amended. The completed community upgrades in 
Antelope, Butte Creek, and Okreek communities are in the transfer 
process. Parmelee, Upper Swift Bear, and Spring Creek community water 
system upgrades will be completed by the end of FY 2022. RSRWS is 
proposing a budget request of $2,639,660.00 for FY2021 including the 
RAX request for a new production well.
6. Lower Brule Rural Water System
    The Lower Brule Rural Water System (LBRWS) consists of a water 
treatment plant, six booster stations, three tanks/reservoirs, 
approximately 75 miles of core pipeline and approximately 300 miles of 
distribution pipeline. LBRWS has a staff of 12 full-time and two part-
time employees to provide the operation and maintenance of these 
facilities. As shown in Table 1, wages and fringe benefits total 
$972,800.
    The budget continues to include $150,000 to upgrade main line meter 
vaults and $25,000 to obtain the GPS location of water lines installed 
by ranchers and to add the lines to the current GIS database. The meter 
pit upgrades will improve access to the meter vaults and prolong the 
life of the equipment within the meter pits, while the GPS/GIS 
information will provide needed information for the operation and 
maintenance as well as the management of the system.
    Zebra mussels were found in Lake Sharpe in 2019. Recent 
investigations of the LBRWS intake and intake pumps have found the 
zebra mussel infestation becoming a detriment to the LBRWS system. The 
result is a need to remove the zebra mussels currently on the 
infrastructure as well as installing a system to attempt to control the 
zebra mussel infestation on and within the LBRWS infrastructure. As a 
result, the budget includes $200,000 to deal with the zebra mussel 
infestation in Lake Sharpe. LBRWS will continue to work with the Bureau 
of Reclamation and the other sponsors to prioritize their needs and 
ensure that their system is operating to the standards that have been 
established over the past several years.
7. Bureau of Reclamation (BOR)
    The BOR&#x27;s budget is for oversight of operation and maintenance 
activities for all tribal systems, including the employment of an 
equivalent 8.0 persons. BOR pays the Western Area Power Administration 
for Project preference power used by the OSRWSS core system and Rosebud 
core system. BOR also pays for cathodic protection services for OSRWSS 
core system, Rosebud, and OSRWSS on-reservation DWM&amp;C systems. 
Reclamation costs are expended before funds reach the Project.

    [This statement was submitted by Ron Blacksmith, Core System 
Manager, Oglala Sioux Rural Water Supply System, Chuck Jacobs, 
Distribution System Director, Oglala Sioux RWSS, Young Colombe, 
Manager, Rosebud Sioux Rural Water System, and Jim McCauley, Manager, 
Lower Brule Sioux Rural Water System.]
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of the National Association for State Community 
                           Services Programs
    As Weatherization Director for the National Association for State 
Community Services Programs (NASCSP), I am pleased to submit testimony 
on the FY 2022 Energy and Water Appropriations bill. Specifically, I am 
writing in support of the Department of Energy&#x27;s (DOE) Weatherization 
Assistance Program (WAP) and seeking an FY 2022 appropriations total of 
$356 million, with $325 million for the WAP, $10 million for Training 
and Technical Assistance at DOE, and $21 million for the Weatherization 
Readiness Fund. This funding level is essential to expand current 
program operations and empower the WAP to improve client services, 
develop workforce training, innovate efficiency technologies, and 
ensure equitable delivery of services.
    NASCSP is the member organization representing the weatherization 
grantees in all 50 States, the District of Columbia, Native American 
Tribes and US Territories, who oversee a weatherization workforce 
operating in every county. The state offices represented by our 
organization would like to thank the members of this Committee for 
their support of the WAP over the years, particularly the 
reauthorization of the program last year and the increase provided in 
FY 2021. The WAP is a comprehensive whole-house retrofit program 
serving people with low incomes by improving energy efficiency, 
resident health and safety, and client finances through lower utility 
costs. WAP workers are highly trained energy auditors, certified by a 
national network of accredited nonprofits, small businesses, and 
educational institutions in the use of advanced tools and technologies 
to diagnose home performance. The WAP is a proven investment in the 
sustainability, health, and resiliency of our communities, not only by 
permanently benefiting low-income families disproportionally burdened 
by energy costs, but also through supporting thousands of quality green 
jobs in the building trades. As we continue the recovery from the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the WAP is an opportunity to invest in a growing 
clean energy workforce, improve the health of thousands of families, 
and fight climate change.
   formula funding--leveraging funds for energy &amp; non-energy benefits
    The Department of Energy (DOE) funding appropriated by Congress has 
allowed more than 8 million homes to be weatherized since the program&#x27;s 
inception in 1976. Each home receives a site-specific suite of energy 
efficiency measures to be installed, such as insulation, air sealing, 
and high efficiency HVAC systems. By improving the energy efficiency of 
the home, these long-term investments save families money when they are 
installed and for years to come. With lower energy bills, families have 
more to spend on essentials like food, clothing, education, and health 
care. These whole-home benefits are central to the WAP&#x27;s mission.
    A robust appropriation for weatherization and DOE Training &amp; 
Technical assistance is key to ensuring equitable allocation of 
funding, sustained WAP impact on a nationwide scale, and consistent and 
growing workforce development. WAP measures completed with DOE funds 
are subject to at least three layers of quality assurance: quality 
control is performed on every job by a local certified inspector; at 
least 5 percent of all completed jobs receive a second inspection by a 
state quality assurance monitor; and DOE monitors the quality assurance 
practices of all state WAP offices. This multi-layered approach to 
monitoring is designed to maximize the benefits from public funds and 
to ensure clients in every state receive the best possible services.
    Another critical WAP benefit is improved health and safety for 
families. In homes that are cold and drafty, or affected by mold and 
excess moisture, there is an increased risk of chronic illnesses. 
Studies have shown the weatherization measures result in a healthier 
living environment. An evaluation by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Evaluation \1\ found that residents of weatherized homes experienced 
fewer asthma, allergy, and cold symptoms, as well as fewer missed days 
of work and school. Weatherization mitigates factors that can trigger 
an asthma attack, resulting in fewer emergency room visits and 
hospitalizations. WAP measures can also prevent other life-threatening 
events such as carbon monoxide poisoning and fires from unsafe heating 
sources. These benefits are especially critical at a time when many are 
staying at home more than ever. These outcomes pay off--every 
weatherization dollar spent returns $2.78 in non-energy benefits.\2\ 
The Oak Ridge Evaluation found that families reported decreased out of-
pocket medical expenses by an average of $514 and the total health and 
household-related benefits for each unit weatherized is estimated to be 
$14,148.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Oak Ridge National Lab, ``Health and Household-Related Benefits 
Attributable to the Weatherization Assistance Program&#x27;&#x27;, 2014. https://
weatherization.ornl.gov/Retrospectivepdfs/ORNL_
TM-2014_345.pdf.
    \2\ Oak Ridge National Lab, ``Weatherization Works--Summary of 
Findings&#x27;&#x27;, 2014. https://weatherization.ornl.gov/Retrospectivepdfs/
ORNL_TM-2014_338.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
         creating the energy efficiency workforce of the future
    The WAP is overseen by the Office of Weatherization and 
Intergovernmental Programs within the Office of Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy (EERE). DOE&#x27;s focus on research and development brings 
the WAP significant benefits including technical expertise, access to 
the latest building science, and opportunities for collaboration with 
other critical energy efficiency and clean energy initiatives. DOE&#x27;s 
technical standards and state offices&#x27; rigorous monitoring ensure that 
clients receive the latest weatherization measures, maximizing the 
benefits to low-income families. DOE&#x27;s Standard Work Specifications \3\ 
and Home Energy Professionals \4\ certifications have become the gold 
standard for residential energy efficiency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Standard Work Specifications for Home Energy Upgrades https://
sws.nrel.gov/.
    \4\ Home Energy Professionals Certifications https://
www.energy.gov/eere/wipo/guidelines-home-energy-professionals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Every state crafts and implements a training and technical 
assistance plan to build a strong workforce in their state network and 
maintain skilled labor that meets the necessary DOE requirements. The 
WAP provides training and workforce development opportunities in the 
very same communities in which it is delivering energy efficiency 
services, introducing low-income people to a rewarding career field 
they may not have encountered otherwise. The energy efficiency work of 
the WAP supports more than 8,500 jobs in weatherization and thousands 
more across the supply chain of suppliers, trainers, and manufacturers. 
Additionally, because of the advanced diagnostics and technology 
developed in WAP, the program forms the foundation for the home 
performance industry, which employs thousands of workers who complete 
energy efficiency retrofits across the entire residential sector, 
contributing to the overall 2.38 million energy efficiency jobs found 
across the nation and in 99.8% of all US counties.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ Energy Futures Initiative and the National Association for 
State Energy Officials, ``U.S. Energy &amp; Employment Report&#x27;&#x27;, 2020. 
https://www.usenergyjobs.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As the WAP workforce and its impact grows, the training and 
technical assistance provided by DOE becomes even more critical. Since 
FY 2014 DOE has received $3 million or less each year for these 
purposes. As we have shown above, DOE&#x27;s training, technical assistance, 
and technological support is critical to the WAP and the broader energy 
efficiency industry. By raising training and technical assistance 
support to $10 million, DOE will continue to develop new technologies, 
improve the health and wellbeing of thousands of low-income people, and 
ensure the United States leads the world in energy efficient and 
quality housing.
               continuing the wap&#x27;s history of innovation
    The State WAP grantee is a key driver in developing new best 
practices for weatherization services. There are numerous examples of 
States across the country building on the success of the WAP and 
maximizing the impact of weatherization.
  --Workforce Development &amp; Career Building
    Positions within the residential energy efficiency and building 
science trades offer workers extensive career advancement and training 
opportunities, in addition to a compelling mission helping their low-
income neighbors. Numerous states partner with local technical colleges 
and community groups to provide excellent training opportunities, 
including to people with low incomes who may be served by the program. 
For example, the Illinois Home Weatherization Assistance Program offers 
trade school tuition reimbursement for new and existing employees and 
cosponsors a High School Energy Efficiency Summer Internship program.
    We recognize the great potential of workforce development 
initiatives like these to provide quality careers to people from 
disadvantaged backgrounds while also ensuring the United States is a 
leader in the growing energy efficiency sector.
Enhancement &amp; Innovation Grants
    When the WAP allocation surpasses $275 million, DOE has the option 
to provide Sustainable Energy Resources for Consumers (SERC) grants for 
the purpose of expanding the materials, benefits and tools covered by 
the WAP.\6\ The new WAP reauthorization established an additional WAP 
Enhancement and Innovation Competitive Grant Program, which utilizes 6% 
of the WAP appropriation for developing new practices. DOE plans to 
implement both SERC and the Competitive Grant Program in the coming 
year, providing a boost of investment in new technologies, innovative 
service delivery practices, and enhancement energy auditing techniques. 
State WAP grantees support innovation through both programs by 
implementing and evaluating new best practices. An evaluation from Oak 
Ridge National Lab \7\ found that the national weatherization network 
is highly capable of installing and delivering a wide range of new and 
innovative renewable energy and energy efficiency measures and 
services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ 42 U.S.C. Chapter 81 Sec. 6872. Authorization of 
appropriations.
    \7\ Sustainable Energy Resources for Consumers Grant Program 
Evaluation, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL/TM-2017/703).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reducing Deferrals Through Pre-Weatherization Programs
    Particularly severe conditions in a home can make installing 
weatherization measures unsafe or ineffective, causing the home to be 
deferred from receiving WAP services until the conditions are 
addressed. For example, standing water in a basement can damage 
appliances, old electrical wiring can be a fire hazard with insulation, 
and major structural or roofing deficiencies can make working in spaces 
unsafe. States have taken the lead with innovative Pre-WAP programs 
utilizing leveraged (non-DOE) funding sources to make homes 
weatherization ready. Pre-WAP initiatives like Ohio&#x27;s Home 
Weatherization Assistance Program Enhancement fund and Pennsylvania&#x27;s 
Homes in Need Program are formed through partnerships with their state 
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program to perform needed energy-
related repairs. Washington&#x27;s Deferral Pilot Program leverages State 
funding to address structural and mechanical issues at deferred homes 
while also developing best practices for tracking these deferrals. The 
success of these individual examples illustrates that additional 
investment in non-energy related upgrades leads to reduced deferrals 
and improved delivery of services to homes that otherwise would be 
excluded from receiving the benefits of WAP. These conditions exist in 
all States and highlight the need for investing in a Weatherization 
Readiness Fund to address deferrals.
Weatherization Plus Health
    Many States are implementing pilot programs or partnering with 
State housing agencies to implement Weatherization plus Health 
initiatives. The need for programs addressing indoor air quality have 
become particularly pronounced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Beyond the 
inherent health benefits of weatherization, these efforts leverage 
weatherization service providers to incorporate additional healthy 
homes measures, like hard surface flooring, enhanced ventilation, mold 
abatement, and accessibility improvements. Local WAP agencies have 
partnered with community health workers to provide enhanced client 
education on energy and health. Combined with basic weatherization 
measures, Weatherization Plus Health can target those with chronic 
health conditions that result from in-home factors, adding substantial 
healthcare savings on top of energy benefits.
                                closing
    In closing, I would like to underscore the critical need for 
continued Department of Energy funding for the Weatherization 
Assistance Program. An FY 2022 appropriations total of $356 million, 
with $325 million for the WAP, $10 million for Training and Technical 
Assistance at DOE, and $21 million for the proposed Weatherization 
Readiness Fund will sustain and expand the program as its scope and 
impact continue to grow. Through enhancing weatherization services, 
developing innovative new technologies, and building a strong and well-
trained workforce, the Weatherization Assistance Programs uplifts low-
income communities and cements the United States as a leader in 
residential energy efficiency.
    We look forward to working with Committee members in the future to 
ensure the WAP continues to deliver cost effective results that support 
our economy and make a difference in the lives of the most vulnerable 
in our communities. Thank you.
    Respectfully submitted.

    [This statement was submitted by Andrea Schroer, WAP Director, 
National 
Association for State Community Services Programs.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the National Association of State Energy 
                               Officials
    Chairman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and members of the 
Subcommittee, I am David Terry, Executive Director of the National 
Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO). I am testifying on 
behalf of our 56 governor-designated state and territory members. NASEO 
respectfully requests funding for the following U.S. Department of 
Energy (DOE) programs: $121 million for the U.S. State Energy Program 
(SEP) with $90 million directed for formula grants to the states (plus 
$5 million for technical assistance to states and $25 million to 
address energy and air quality in schools); $325 million for the 
Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP) (plus $10 million for technical 
assistance); $530 million for the Building Technologies Office, 
including $100 million for building energy codes-especially funding to 
support state and local technical assistance, and $50 million for grid-
interactive efficient buildings; $400 million for the Vehicle 
Technologies Office; $280 million for the Solar Energy Program; $56 
million for FEMP, including $2 million for the state collaborative; 
$252 million for the Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and 
Emergency Response, including $50 million for energy-sector risk 
mitigation grants to states and $20 million for program direction; $225 
million for the Office of Electricity, including $25 million for 
Transmission Permitting and State Technical Assistance; and $2 million 
for Office of Policy to produce the U.S. Energy Employment Report. The 
$90 million SEP request and $325 million WAP request is supported by 
the ``Dear Colleague&#x27;&#x27; letter, signed by 45 members, you received last 
week, led by Mr. Reed and Ms. Collins. These requests are separate from 
additional funding necessary for infrastructure and climate change 
responses. Section VI of the FY21 House Energy and Water Development 
Appropriations bill is a good starting point for addressing climate and 
infrastructure, with funding for SEP, WAP and EECBG. DOE must move 
quickly to fill the 150 jobs within EERE, or the Subcommittee&#x27;s 
objectives and the Administration&#x27;s agenda will not be satisfied.
    The underlying SEP statute provides extraordinary flexibility and 
reflects the states&#x27; approach to advancing renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, transportation electrification, energy workforce 
development, resilience and climate actions, and energy-sector 
security. For example, the eight state REVWest initiative is advancing 
EV infrastructure and many states use SEP funds to accelerate this 
work. Southeastern states use SEP funds to collaborate on energy 
emergency planning, response, and resilience. States are coordinating 
on workforce development and equity programs with SEP. In addition, 
states from across regions use SEP funds to accelerate energy 
technology innovation initiatives in coordination with universities and 
the private sector. All of this work is accomplished through the SEP 
formula funds. Past Administrations have sought to ``slice off&#x27;&#x27; a 
portion of the SEP formula funds provided by Congress for DOE-directed 
competitive awards in areas selected by DOE. NASEO strongly opposes the 
use of this approach which limits states collaborative work on priority 
activities.
    According to two Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) studies, SEP 
provides exceptional value. ORNL found that each dollar of SEP formula 
funds used by the states leverages $10.71 of state and private funds 
and realizes $7.22 in energy cost savings for citizens and businesses.
    The State Energy Offices lead or co-lead energy emergency planning 
and response across electricity, natural gas, and petroleum products. 
This state-federal-private function is a hallmark of SEP. NASEO also 
strongly supports the role of CESER. It is critical to increase program 
direction funds to manage and deliver these critical functions. 
Finally, SEP is one of the only connections between billions of dollars 
spent by DOE on R&amp;D and the priorities of states. A greater reliance by 
DOE on the states to ensure federal R&amp;D meets real world conditions 
would maximize the impact of R&amp;D funding and leverage the vast 
deployment capability of states. Greater coordination among EERE, FE, 
OE, CESER, ARPA-E and the states is necessary.
    Below are a few examples of the states&#x27; utilization of SEP funding:
    Alabama.--The Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs 
(ADECA) supported energy efficiency upgrades at wastewater treatment 
plants and local facilities. ADECA issued 21 grants to local 
governments, universities, and nonprofits to reduce energy costs by 
making their facilities more efficient.
    Alaska.--Support LED Streetlight Replacement in 64 Rural Alaska 
Communities. The Alaska Energy Authority (AEA) used SEP funds to 
support outdoor lighting retrofits in rural communities. Through a 
public-private partnership, AEA&#x27;s Village Energy Efficiency Program 
(VEEP), and despite the COVID-19 pandemic, communities have actively 
managed to implement their projects totaling $2,156,851. Fourteen sites 
are complete, 594 lights have been replaced, and 225,774 kilowatt-hours 
(kWh) per year will be saved. Cost per kWh in these communities ranges 
between $0.19--$0.86. All 64 sites are expected to be complete by 
September 30, 2021.
    California.--Supports Development of Appliance Standards. 
California uses SEP funds to develop and implement appliance and 
building standards. In 2020, appliance standards became effective for 
general services lamps (GSL), walk-in coolers and freezers, ceiling 
fans, ceiling fan light kits, portable air conditioners, spray 
sprinkler bodies, and pool pumps. New appliance standards will lead to 
energy and cost savings. For example, after GSL stock turns over, 
annual electricity savings will be 4,000-13,600 gigawatt-hours; 
portable air conditioners will realize 369 gigawatt-hours in savings; 
spray sprinkler bodies will save 150 billion gallons of water per year; 
and pool pump motors will save 62 gigawatt-hours annually.
    Delaware.--Evaluation of Energy Efficiency, Green Energy and 
Weatherization Programs. The Delaware Department of Natural Resources 
and Environmental Control&#x27;s Division of Climate, Coastal and Energy 
recently completed the Year 2 comprehensive evaluation of our Energy 
Efficiency Investment Fund (EEIF), Green Energy Fund (GEF) and 
Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP). The evaluation was done by an 
independent contractor as required by the Evaluation, Measurement and 
Verification (EM&amp;V) regulations that are promulgated in Delaware. The 
Total Resource Cost (TRC) test results from the evaluation were 2.98 
for EEIF; 1.38 for GEF; and 1.22 for WAP. In other words, with TRCs 
above 1.0, our programs are successfully leveraging funds at a rate 
greater than every dollar we invest.
    Illinois.--Achieved 2,431,955 kWh Annual Savings in Environmental 
Justice Communities. The Illinois Energy Office used SEP funds to 
support upgrades at four publicly-owned wastewater treatment plants in 
2020, leveraging $16,018,574 in matching funds from municipalities and 
saving 2,431,955 kWhs annually. Of the total $2,527,424 in funds 
awarded, 79% of was granted to facilities serving EJ communities.
    Kentucky.--Support COVID-19 Energy System Response, Provided 
Generators for COVID-19 Testing Sites. The Kentucky Office of Energy 
Policy (KY OEP) used SEP funds to perform critical emergency functions 
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the commonwealth&#x27;s 
response, KY OEP coordinated with the Kentucky Public Service 
Commission to support Emergency Support Function 12--Energy (ESF-12); 
Commonwealth agencies&#x27; response to energy issues in the Commonwealth; 
state level situational awareness around energy issues during an 
emergency; and with the private sector for the emergency repair and 
restoration of critical public energy utilities (i.e. gas, electric, 
fuels, etc.).
    Louisiana.--Key Corridor LED Lighting Results in Energy Cost and 
GHG Reductions. The Louisiana State Energy Office partnered with 
Orleans Parish to install LED street lighting along two highway 
corridors, resulting in an estimated savings of approximately 40 
percent in utilities costs, annual energy savings of 9,520,754 kWh, 
7,946 tons of greenhouse gas emissions. The project was made possible 
through the SEP-supported Energy Efficiency Revolving Loan Fund, a 
program that was established in 2001 to offer low interest, tax exempt 
financing for public entities implementing approved renewable energy 
and energy efficient upgrades. The program has resulted in over 30 low 
interest public sector loans totaling $23.6 million.
    Maine.--Support Clean Energy and Climate Efforts, Energy Efficiency 
Initiatives, and COVID Coordination. In Maine, the Governor&#x27;s Energy 
Office (GEO) used SEP funding to pursue, develop, and implement nation-
leading energy initiatives, including a floating offshore wind 
demonstration project and new programs aimed at installing 100,000 new 
high efficiency air source heat pumps by 2025. In 2020, the GEO 
assisted in the development of the state&#x27;s 4-year climate action plan--
Maine Won&#x27;t Wait. This plan outlines how Maine will achieve the 
statutory requirement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions of 45 percent 
by 2030 from 1990 levels and 80 percent by 2050.
    Michigan.--Energy Efficiency Upgrades Help Michigan Communities 
Save $241,874 Annually. The Michigan Energy Office-supported Community 
Energy Management (CEM) program enabled energy benchmarking in 708,380 
square feet of buildings, with initial savings estimates of $241,874 
annually after energy efficiency upgrades. CEM, funded in part by SEP, 
offers financial incentives directly to municipalities, tuition-free K-
12 schools, and other community-serving public entities to accelerate 
the transition to energy efficiency and renewable energy. Projects 
range from creating energy plans, benchmarking and auditing, lighting 
and HVAC, to solar installations. This program allows communities to 
lead by example.
    Montana.--Delivers Personal Protective Equipment to Essential 
Workers, Leads Energy Emergency Response. The Montana Energy Office 
leveraged SEP funding to respond to energy emergencies resulting from 
the COVID-19 pandemic, including delivering personal protective 
equipment to essential energy workers. The Montana Energy Office 
coordinates the state&#x27;s Emergency Support Function 12 (ESF-12), the 
team charged with monitoring and responding to energy supply 
emergencies. Leveraging key funding from the State Energy Program, 
Montana&#x27;s ESF-12 team reached out to utilities, refineries, and 
businesses across the energy sector to determine impacts of the 
pandemic on energy supply operations.
    New Hampshire.--Reduced Local School Energy Costs. One example of 
the results of New Hampshire&#x27;s annual School Energy Efficiency 
Development (SEED) grant program is the Lempster Community School. This 
schools saved over $7,000 in annual energy costs in 2020.
    New Mexico.--Grid Modernization Roadmap Improves the Reliability, 
Efficiency, and Security of the Power System. In 2020, SEP funds were 
used to provide support for the development of the Energy Grid 
Modernization Roadmap that will help New Mexico improve the 
reliability, efficiency, and security of the power system. The New 
Mexico State Energy Office launched the Grid Modernization Advisory 
Group in September 2020.
    North Dakota.--Deploy Solar Panels Bolster Resiliency, Educate 
Students at Career Academy. Supported installation of 115 panels and an 
inverter at the Bismarck Public Schools Career Academy in October 2020. 
In addition to powering the building, instructors at the school plan to 
start incorporating the panels into their lessons. The solar array was 
funded by a $92,000 State Energy Program grant though the North Dakota 
Department of Commerce.
    Oregon.--Transitioning to Cleaner, Low-Carbon Energy Future. The 
Oregon Department of Energy (ODOE) released its 2020 Biennial Energy 
Report, which covers a range of energy topics germane to the state, and 
is designed to inform the legislature, state and local governments, 
other key stakeholders, and the public on policy development, planning, 
and investments. The 2020 Report offers discussions on an array of 
energy topics, including decarbonization, the transition of the 
electric grid, innovation in the natural gas system, cleaner 
transportation, the effects of the pandemic on the energy sector, and 
the built environment and Oregon&#x27;s communities.
    South Carolina.--Support Electric Vehicles and Decrease GHG 
Emissions from State Fleet. Using SEP funds, the South Carolina Energy 
Office purchased the first state fleet electric vehicle (EV) and 
installed EV charging stations at state parks. In 2016, the State 
Energy Plan included a ``Lead by Example&#x27;&#x27; recommendation to increase 
transportation fuel efficiency and diversity.
    Tennessee.--Creates Plan to Double EV Charging Stations. The 
Tennessee Energy Office used SEP funds to support the roll-out of a 
statewide network of EV fast-charging stations, which will result in 
doubling the number of available EV fast-chargers. In 2019, Drive 
Electric Tennessee released a roadmap to increase EV adoption to 
200,000 EVs (up from 11,000 EVs). This network will connect rural and 
urban areas and will improve efficiency and resiliency.
    Vermont.--Support Low-Carbon Technologies Through Rate Design 
Initiative. In Vermont, the State Energy Office directed SEP funds to 
support the development of the Vermont Rate Design Initiative (RDI), 
which identified advanced forms of load management and rate designs to 
foster low-carbon technologies, customer-sited renewables, and energy 
storage that will further energy and environmental objectives while 
minimizing ratepayer challenges from electrification and power sector 
transformation over the long term. The Department of Public Service 
continues to build on progress in the RDI through its role as the State 
Energy Office.
    Washington.--Develop State Energy Strategy, Prioritizes Underserved 
Communities. Washington&#x27;s Energy Office helped the state move toward a 
clean, affordable, and just energy future by completing legislative 
rulemakings, developing a new state energy strategy, and incorporating 
equity principles into clean energy programs. Washington completed 
rules related to the clean electricity, clean buildings and new energy 
efficient appliance standards legislation passed in 2019. The state 
charted the next frontier of energy policy opportunities by completing 
the 2021 State Energy Strategy. The State Energy Office also 
administers the Clean Energy Fund grant awards, which prioritize 
communities underserved by EV infrastructure.
    Wisconsin.--Create a $25 Million Energy Innovation Program. The 
Wisconsin State Energy Office implemented a program for manufacturers, 
municipalities, tribes, and k-12 school districts to increase energy 
efficiency and the use of renewable energy and transportation 
technologies, bolster resiliency in the energy system, and advance 
energy planning. For example, $5 million provided to 30 that leveraged 
$4.5 million in local and private energy investments.

    [This statement was submitted by David Terry, Executive Director, 
National 
Association of State Energy Officials.]
                                 ______
                                 
       Prepared Statement of the National Hydropower Association
    The National Hydropower Association (NHA) respectfully requests 
$222 million for the U.S. Department of Energy&#x27;s (DOE) Water Power 
Technologies Office (WPTO) in the Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Energy and 
Water Development Appropriations measure. NHA recommends at least the 
authorized level of $137 million for marine energy along with the Biden 
Administration request of $85 million for the hydropower program, with 
full funding of both the EPAct 2005 Section 242 hydroelectric 
production incentive program and the Section 243 efficiency incentive 
program. NHA also supports robust funding for the operations and 
maintenance (O&amp;M) programs of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) 
and Bureau of Reclamation (BuRec) to increase capacity and generation 
at their facilities, addressing the billions of dollars of backlogged 
O&amp;M needs.
                         funding justification
    The U.S. water power industry has tremendous beneficial impacts on 
our nation&#x27;s electric grid, the economy, and environment. Hydropower 
delivers almost 40% of total U.S. renewable electricity generation and 
pumped storage projects provide 93% of total energy storage in the 
country. Hydropower also avoids approximately 200 million metric tons 
of CO2 emissions each year. In addition to providing affordable, 
renewable power to the grid, hydropower and pumped storage help 
integrate greater amounts of variable renewable generation, such as 
wind and solar, while maintaining grid reliability and resilience. 
Finally, thousands of Americans have high value employment due to water 
power projects in every region of the country.
    Yet, the industry is poised to do even more. The U.S. has 
significant underutilized water power resources, including non-powered 
dams, conduits, new pumped storage, and marine energy. Advancement of 
new and innovative technologies, operations, and approaches to harness 
these resources in a globally competitive marketplace is greatly 
enhanced by federal funding that augments research, development, and 
deployment (RD&amp;D) efforts underway in the private sector. A growing 
U.S. water power industry will support efforts to address climate 
change and reduce carbon emissions, assist in grid reliability and 
resiliency, while also advancing our national economic goals. Increased 
funding is critical and will help create high-quality employment and 
support businesses across the country that comprise the water power 
supply chain.
    NHA commends Congress for its increased support of the DOE WPTO in 
recent years, culminating in the $150 million funding level in FY 2021. 
However, this investment still remains well below that historically 
afforded other DOE renewable R&amp;D programs. For comparison, the Biden 
Administration just requested an additional $106 million for the Solar 
Energy Office, which is currently funded at $273 million. Meanwhile, 
more than 5 GW of new solar capacity was installed in the U.S. during 
the first quarter of 2021, with total U.S. solar capacity now over 100 
GW. This is up from just 1 GW of U.S. solar capacity in 2009. These 
commercial deployments are subsidized with approximately $2.5 billion 
of yearly federal expenditures through the Investment Tax Credit.
    The view of NHA and its members is that these significant and 
sustained federal technology RD&amp;D and market acceleration initiatives 
are one of the critical factors related to the tremendous growth in 
U.S. solar (and wind) deployments over the past decade. A similar level 
of federal investment for water power is required to accelerate the 
pace of technology demonstrations and deployments, reduce costs, and 
increase adoption.
    NHA greatly appreciates the significant proposed FY 2022 budget 
increase for the WPTO, particularly that of the hydropower program, 
which NHA strongly supports. NHA&#x27;s FY 2022 request builds on the 
foundation of the Administration&#x27;s budget request by seeking $137 
million for the marine energy program. This represents full funding of 
the reauthorized levels adopted as part of the Water Power R&amp;D Act of 
2020, enacted as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021. 
NHA also supports full funding of the EPAct 2005 hydropower incentives 
within the $85 million for the hydropower program, also reauthorized in 
the FY 2021 appropriations bill. The Administration&#x27;s FY 2022 budget 
request did not include any funding for the incentives.
      overview of doe water power technologies office investments
    Last year, as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, 
Congress renewed authorization of the DOE WPTO through passage of the 
Water Power R&amp;D Act of 2020 and the Reliable Investment in Vital Energy 
Reauthorization Act (RIVER Act). These measures authorize investments 
in water power technology innovation and deployment as well as 
workforce development efforts. These federal investments are essential 
to create high value job growth and maximize the contribution of 
renewable water power resources as part of a 100% clean energy future.
    The Water Power R&amp;D bill provides annual authorization levels for 
the DOE WPTO RD&amp;D activities for FY 2021-2025 of $137 million for 
marine energy and $49 million for hydropower. NHA views these 
recommendations as the minimum required to support WPTO investments on 
innovation of advanced technologies to increase power production and 
reduce costs, improve grid reliability and resilience, create new 
market opportunities that improve economic growth, and fund cross-
institutional foundational research to support workforce development.
    In addition, the RIVER Act authorizes $10 million per year for the 
Section 242 hydroelectric production incentive and $10 million per year 
for the Section 243 hydroelectric efficiency incentive, both of which 
were first adopted as part of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. The 
production incentive, which is currently oversubscribed, provides 
financial support for new hydropower facilities constructed at existing 
dams and conduits and was amended to include new small hydro projects 
constructed in areas of inadequate electric service. The efficiency 
incentive, which supports capital improvements at existing hydropower 
facilities that improve efficiency by at least three percent, has not 
previously received appropriations.
    Hydropower.--NHA supports the Biden Administration request of $85 
million for the hydropower program, with $10 million for Section 242 
and $10 million for Section 243. Hydropower is a proven renewable 
electricity resource, accounting for nearly 7% of all U.S. electricity 
production. However, increased WPTO investments can significantly 
expand generation from this resource. For example, only 3% of the 
approximately 80,000 existing dams in the U.S. currently generate 
electricity. Other growth opportunities include increasing efficiencies 
and expanding capacity at existing hydropower projects, new pumped 
storage facilities, and new small hydro development. Pumped storage 
represents a significant opportunity because of its increased grid 
reliability benefits, additional energy storage, and support for the 
integration of intermittent renewable generation resources.
    The WPTO invests in hydropower technology RD&amp;D for innovative 
standardized and modular approaches to hydropower development that can 
lower project costs versus traditional projects. For small hydropower 
specifically, the WPTO supports standardization of new turbine designs, 
as well as new advanced materials and manufacturing across the sector, 
including applications at non-powered dams, irrigation channels, and 
other waterways. This work increases generation opportunities with 
innovations that also improve environmental performance. It also helps 
reduces costs for companies that have capitalization challenges to fund 
this work. The WPTO supports DOE&#x27;s Advanced Energy Storage Initiative 
and focuses on the role of hydropower and pumped storage in grid 
reliability and resiliency by supporting innovative technologies and 
conducting new research to evaluate and improve the flexibility and 
grid services provided by these projects. The WPTO also supports 
development of innovative environmental mitigation technologies, such 
as novel fish passage systems and other advancements.
    Marine Energy.--NHA requests at minimum the $137 million for the 
marine energy program that was authorized on a bipartisan basis in the 
Water Power R&amp;D Act. Marine energy technologies-powered by water-based 
renewable resources such as currents, tides, and waves-are undergoing 
rapid innovation and will be critical in helping to reach 100% clean 
energy targets and related climate change goals by 2035. Marine energy 
will also provide benefits to the electric system and facilitate off-
grid ``Blue Economy&#x27;&#x27; market opportunities. These benefits include 
marine energy&#x27;s location near demand loads, relative predictability, 
generating profiles, and resiliency. Finally, marine energy has 
significant near-term promise, particularly in coastal, riverine, and 
island environments that currently rely on high-cost fossil fuels. 
Marine energy technologies offer the opportunity to provide lower cost 
power while dramatically reducing harmful emissions for widely 
distributed, previously underserved, or economically distressed 
waterfront communities.
    The U.S. has substantial marine energy resources, which are 
geographically diverse, reliable, predictable, and environmentally 
friendly. DOE conservatively estimates the marine energy resource in 
all 50 states at 2,300 TWh/year, equivalent to 57% of U.S. electricity 
generation (based on 2019 numbers). Utilizing just 10% of this 
potential resource would equate to nearly 6% of total generation and 
represents more than three times current solar generation, one quarter 
of the U.S. coal fleet, and is enough to power approximately 22 million 
homes.
    The WPTO supports RD&amp;D for marine energy systems and subsystems 
ultimately leading to reduced costs and increased deployments. The WPTO 
validates the reliability of marine energy technologies and the value 
of integrating energy from prototype devices into the electric grid and 
Blue Economy applications. These funds provide risk mitigation, 
technical advancement and review, and early market growth 
opportunities. The program has now established the following four focus 
areas:
1-Materials and Components Research and Development; 2-Systems 
        Integration and Validation; 3-Testing and Reliability; and, 4-
        Data, Modeling, and Analysis
    NHA strongly supports additional funding in these focus areas. 
There are wide ranges of design approaches to marine energy systems. It 
is likely that different designs will be most effective in diverse 
resource areas or for various market applications. Increased funding is 
required to support the design, construction, and validation of marine 
energy systems in open water deployments, with a balanced approach 
across resource areas that reflects the higher funding requirements of 
more mature designs. In addition, a key barrier to marine energy 
technology development is the difficulty of testing new designs. 
Funding is needed to establish and expand testing infrastructure 
including open-water test centers such as PacWave. Funds are also 
needed to conduct the tests along with environmental monitoring 
technologies and research to expedite permitting and in-water 
demonstration.
    Unfortunately, the budget submission failed to request funding for 
the following focus areas, which NHA urges the subcommittee to support:
    Foundational Research.--Marine energy technologies present unique 
engineering challenges that require collaborative foundational 
innovations by cross-institution teams of researchers. NHA urges 
establishment of dedicated funding for foundational research activities 
led by universities and other research institutions affiliated with the 
National Marine Energy Centers to accelerate development of the marine 
energy sector and help train a skilled workforce for the Labs and 
industry.
    Powering the Blue Economy (PBE).--Marine energy systems can be a 
cost-effective and reliable power source in several distributed ``Blue 
Economy&#x27;&#x27; markets, such as aquaculture, desalination, oil and gas 
production, underwater data centers, and other emerging needs. However, 
prototypes must be tailored to specific applications and their 
performance demonstrated to facilitate adoption in these markets. NHA 
urges continued funding of the WPTO PBE activities.
                             other agencies
    NHA also recommends close DOE coordination with other agency 
partners, including the U.S. Navy on national security applications for 
marine energy devices, along with FERC, BOEM, and NOAA for regulatory 
efficiencies to support deployment. For hydropower deployment, 
continued DOE engagement with FERC, USACE, BuRec, and federal resource 
agencies is needed to address the amount of time to permit and license 
projects. Finally, NHA urges Congress to increase funding to USACE and 
BuRec to operate, maintain, and upgrade their existing projects, as 
well as to add non-federal hydropower development to their non-powered 
infrastructure. NHA also believes there are ways to make this 
investment that do not increase costs to the power customers. The 
federal hydropower system makes up approximately half of U.S. 
hydropower generation. Many of these projects have been identified, by 
the owners themselves or by equipment suppliers, as candidates for 
upgrade potential and/or have backlogged O&amp;M needs. USACE and BuRec 
projects make the federal government itself one of the largest 
renewable energy providers in the U.S. Reinvesting in these projects 
will help to address climate change, provide economic and job 
opportunities, and maximize the benefits of this public infrastructure.

    [This statement was submitted by Malcolm Woolf, President and CEO, 
National Hydropower Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of the National Marine Manufacturers Association
    Dear Chairwoman Feinstein and Ranking Member Kennedy,
    On behalf of the National Marine Manufacturers Association (NMMA), 
I thank you for convening this hearing to review the FY22 budget 
submission for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and the Bureau 
of Reclamation (USBR). The Biden Administration and 117th Congress face 
perhaps the most daunting challenges of our generation: rebuilding our 
country from the health and economic crisis brought on by the COVID-19 
pandemic and addressing the global climate crisis. As the subcommittee 
looks to bolster the economy and address climate change through the 
FY22 appropriations cycle, we stress that USACE and USBR, leaders in 
providing public access for water-based recreation opportunities, have 
the resources and funding necessary to manage and build more resilient 
public recreation access, protect vulnerable communities, and rebuild 
local economies through facilitating recreation economic activity.
    NMMA is the trade association for the U.S. recreational boating 
industry, representing nearly 1,300 marine businesses, including 
recreational boat, marine engine and accessory manufacturers. NMMA 
members collectively manufacture more than 85 percent of the marine 
products sold in the U.S. Furthermore, the recreational boating 
industry has a significant impact on our nation&#x27;s economy and in 
communities across the country, employing nearly 700,000 American jobs 
across 35,000 U.S.-based marine businesses.
    Led by the recreational boating industry, the outdoor recreation 
economy is a major contributor to the U.S. economy, accounting for 2.1% 
of GDP, $788 billion in economic output, and 5.2 million American jobs. 
The role of recreational boating in our economy has only grown more 
significant as Americans flocked to new outdoor activities amidst the 
COVID-19 pandemic, with sales of new powerboats in the U.S. increasing 
last year by an estimated 12% compared to 2019, reaching a 13-year 
high. Over 44,000 new boat buyers entered the market between March and 
June 2020, representing 10% year-over-year growth. There are many 
encouraging aspects of this new growth including that roughly 30 
percent of the industry&#x27;s growth was made up of new buyers, may of 
which were younger and more diverse.
    While this rise has showcased the popularity of such activities as 
a safe and fun way to spend time with loved ones, it has also 
illuminated one of the most pressing issues facing the industry: the 
need for adequate, sound, and up-to-date infrastructure that meets 
demand. Given that a majority of public recreation access 
infrastructure is already in need of significant maintenance and 
modernizations, our aging access points and facilities are particularly 
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. From rapidly changing 
water levels to increased frequency and intensity of flooding events 
and natural disasters in coastal and inland waterway areas, public 
waterways and outdoor recreation infrastructure need bolstered 
resilience. Without robust investment in our country&#x27;s outdoor 
recreation infrastructure, these economic contributions--along with 
pastimes enjoyed by the vast majority of Americans--will be in 
jeopardy.
    Considering that boating and fishing are the top contributing 
segments within the recreation economy and USACE and USBR together 
offer the majority of water-based recreation opportunities, significant 
potential to grow the outdoor economy-- and the entire U.S. economy--
can be achieved through elevating these agencies&#x27; role in supporting 
recreation, which must be reflected in the appropriations cycle. Higher 
prioritization of these agencies recreation-oriented activities can be 
achieved through ensuring adequate funding from existing programs and 
funding authorities and reforming antiquated project prioritization 
processes that neglect to recognize the significant economic, 
environmental, societal, and health benefits generated by recreation.
    For example, USACE has over 5,000 sites in 43 states, generating 
over $10 billion in economic impact and supporting 189,000 total jobs, 
yet a majority of access infrastructure managed by USACE is in poor 
condition. Of note, there were 256 million visits to USACE lake and 
river projects in 2020 compared to the 237 million visitors NPS hosted. 
Providing USACE and USBR with the necessary tools and resources to 
better manage and support recreation access will go a long way towards 
preserving the nation&#x27;s lakes, reservoirs, rivers, waterways and the 
economic impact of outdoor recreation.
    It&#x27;s important to note that USACE and USBR accounts that support 
recreation are historically underfunded and both agencies are more 
often than not completely excluded from or benefit considerably less 
than other agencies through significantly impactful federal lands and 
waters policy and funding mechanism such as the Federal Lands 
Recreation Enhancement Act (FLREA) and the Great American Outdoors Act 
(GAOA). For instance, While USACE manages recreation visitation and 
transportation infrastructure asset catalogues on scale with the 
National Park Service (NPS), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and 
the U.S. Forest Service (FS), these three agencies 1) are able to 
retain a portion of recreation fee revenue to reinvest in recreation 
infrastructure through FLREA authority, 2) are all GAOA recipients, 
with NPS receiving 70 percent of total GAOA deferred maintenance 
funding, and 3) receive direct set asides from the Federal Lands 
Transportation Program (FLTP) that takes up a majority of the programs 
funding leaving USACE, USBR, and BLM (another GAOA recipient) to 
compete for any remaining funding to go towards maintaining 
infrastructure that provides access to high-visitation.
    On the navigation side of USACE activities, small recreation-based 
ports are critical access points for inland and coastal communities 
where businesses depend on marine recreation-based economic activity. 
Yet, the benefit cost ration (BCR) criteria used to prioritize USACE 
navigation projects only recognizes commercial activity in assessing 
project economic benefits, failing to account for the value created by 
access for recreation activities leaving our economy at a disadvantage. 
Additionally, without sufficient dredging in recreation-based harbors 
and waterways, some recreational boaters are forced to use high traffic 
commercial channels, which can lead to potential user conflicts and 
safety concerns. The federal government has a responsibility to 
maintain all of nation&#x27;s ports, harbors, and waterways, yet for too 
long water infrastructure projects that support recreation access have 
gone underappreciated and neglected, does not consistently account for 
recreation within the scope of economic benefits a project provides. 
Additionally, given that 84 percent of the U.S. recreational boating 
industry is made up of small businesses, this commonsense modernization 
of an antiquated process for prioritizing water infrastructure projects 
will reenergize Main Street in coastal communities across the country. 
BCR reform that would require USACE and the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) to account for recreation as an economic impact in project 
prioritization would exercise a more comprehensive approach that 
ensures critical water infrastructure projects are funded on an 
equitable, sustainable, and needs based system.
    Systemic underfunding of these agencies&#x27; recreation facilities and 
management, combined with USACE&#x27;s lack of authority to reinvest 
recreation fees into revenue-generating infrastructure assets, have 
allowed this infrastructure to decay in the face of rising demand. 
Maintaining this status quo jeopardizes the safety and viability of 
recreation opportunities managed by the leading providers of water-
based public recreation access. Solutions that can be taken through the 
FY22 process to address these deficiencies include:
  --An additional investment of $40 million in the Operations &amp; 
        Maintenance account allocated to USACE Natural Resources 
        Management (NRM) to continue the operation, maintenance, and 
        repair of existing recreation facilities and public access 
        including unfunded infrastructure maintenance needed to sustain 
        existing facilities at full capacity.
  --Direct the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to conduct a 
        survey to provide an inventory of all federally managed 
        recreational boating infrastructure and facilities; an 
        assessment of annual operation and maintenance needs associated 
        with these sites; deferred operation and maintenance needs for 
        such infrastructure and facilities to operate safely at full 
        capacity; opportunities to expand capacity at existing access 
        points; and the economic impact of recreation on regional 
        economies and benefits of sustaining and improving public 
        access at recreational infrastructure and facilities.
  --Dedicated Federal Lands Transportation Program (FLTP) set-aside 
        funding for USACE and USBR at amounts commensurate with each 
        respective agencies&#x27; public transportation improvement needs 
        and visitation demand.
  --Extension of recreation fee retention authorities under FLREA to 
        USACE to provide a much-needed revenue source to improve the 
        quality of recreational assets and services and address the 
        backlog of maintenance needs.
  --Reform BCR criteria to require USACE and OMB to account for 
        recreation as an economic impact to establish an equitable, 
        sustainable, and needs-based system for prioritization USACE 
        navigation projects.
    On behalf of our members, I thank you for your leadership in 
preparing FY22 appropriations legislation and appreciate the 
opportunity to provide comments on how recreation infrastructure can 
play an important role in economic recovery. NMMA stands ready to work 
with you ensure adequate funding for federal land and water agencies 
integral to providing public recreation access, and better enable the 
thriving outdoor sector to get Americans back to work and revive local 
economies across the country.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Callie Hoyt, Director, Federal 
Government 
Relations, National Marine Manufacturers Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the National Water Resources Association
    Chairwoman Feinstein and Ranking Member Kennedy,
    Thank you for your efforts and attention to the importance of water 
infrastructure and its critical connection to our nation&#x27;s economic 
wellbeing and recovery. You are not alone in recognizing the importance 
of water to our nation and its economy. The National Water Resources 
Association (NWRA) shares this conviction. As you embark on efforts to 
develop the FY2022 Energy and Water Appropriations bill we urge you to 
include robust funding for both the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) 
and the Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). Under your leadership 
appropriations for Reclamation and USACE have increased in recent 
years. We thank you for this funding. We now ask that you double down 
on this effort and further increase funds allocated to our nations 
water infrastructure. Increasing appropriations dedicated to water 
infrastructure is one of the most effective ways to protect human 
health and drive economic recovery in both the near and long term.
    The NWRA is a nonpartisan, nonprofit federation of state water 
resources associations, regional associations, agricultural, and 
municipal water providers. Our members provide water and hydropower to 
approximately 50 million individuals, families, agricultural producers, 
and other businesses in a manner that supports communities, the 
economy, and the environment. Our membership spans the Western United 
States as well as portions of the Southeastern United States.
    In light of the country&#x27;s current economic concerns, it is 
important to emphasize the positive impact water infrastructure has on 
both our health and the economy. Water infrastructure systems provide 
communities, businesses, industry, agricultural producers and our 
citizens with an all-important supply of water that is needed not only 
to survive and thrive, but to drive economy recovery.
    Reclamation and USACE water infrastructure is a cornerstone of our 
nation&#x27;s economy and will be a catalyst for economic recovery and 
prosperity. A total of approximately $20 billion dollars was required 
to build Reclamation&#x27;s entire infrastructure system.\1\ Every year, 
this infrastructure returns over $63 billion in direct and associated 
economic activity.\2\ The USACE delivers similar economic benefit. 
Between 2010 and 2013, each dollar invested in USACE civil works 
generated about $16 in economic benefits and $5 in U.S. Treasury 
revenues.\3\ In other words, every year our economy recoups its 
investment in Reclamation and USACE projects multiple times over. These 
economic benefits are realized in communities large and small 
throughout the nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ CRS Report R41844 The Reclamation Fund: A Primer https://
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R41844.
    \2\ U.S. Department of the Interior, Department of the Interior&#x27;s 
Economic Report FY 2018 https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/
uploads/fy-2018-econ-report-final-9-30-19-v2.pdf.
    \3\ U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Determining the return on 
investment of Civil Works projects: A look behind the scenes, Sept. 28, 
2017 https://www.lrb.usace.army.mil/Media/News-Stories/Article/1328990/
determining-the-return-on-investment-of-civil-works-projects-a-look-
behind-the/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As the congressional panel which funds both Reclamation and the 
USACE we ask you to please support strong funding levels for water 
infrastructure across the board. We also recommend robust and targeted 
appropriations that would:
  --Invest in aging infrastructure for both the delivery and storage of 
        water. Both Reclamation and the USACE have multi-billion dollar 
        aging infrastructure backlogs. On April 21, 2021 Reclamation 
        released its Asset Management Report. In this report 
        Reclamation identified approximately 2,800 major rehabilitation 
        and replacement activities (MR&amp;R) with estimated cost totaling 
        $11.9 billion over the next 30 years.\4\ Investing in aging 
        infrastructure now, including implementation and funding of the 
        aging infrastructure authority provided in recent omnibus 
        (Division FF, Title XI, Sec.1101 of P.L. 116-260), will save 
        considerable dollars. If these needs are ignored infrastructure 
        will degrade, water services and the communities that depend on 
        them will suffer, and repair and replacement costs will grow.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation), Asset Management 
Report, April 21, 2021 https://www.usbr.gov/infrastructure/docs/asset-
management-report-to-congress.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Last year Congress authorized a new Aging Infrastructure revolving 
loan program for Reclamation, the Administration has requested $1 
million dollars for this program. This is not sufficient. We 
respectfully request you increase funding in this account to $10 
million for FY2022.
  --In recognition of climate impacts on water supply increase funding 
        to; enhance, maintain, and upgrade physical infrastructure at 
        surface, groundwater, and conjunctive use projects to help 
        capture water in wet years for use in dry years. This would be 
        cost effective, ease drought effects, address flooding and 
        minimize environmental impact.
  --Fund partnerships with state and/or local entities, to perform work 
        on non-federal projects to optimize storage and delivery 
        capability. Allow federal investment in repairing non-federal 
        dams which are deemed unsafe by state regulators. When states 
        limit reservoir capacity because of safety hazards to a full 
        reservoir, the local community served by these reservoirs 
        suffers economically.
  --Provide a significant infusion of construction funds to the already 
        under construction Reclamation rural water projects. These 
        projects receive insufficient annual funding, increasing their 
        total cost and forcing rural and tribal communities to wait 
        even longer for safe and reliable drinking water supplies. 
        Completing these projects would open additional funding 
        opportunity to develop water efficiencies and better manage 
        long-term drought impacts.
    --Increasing investment in water re-use and recycling projects. 
This concept has experienced growing interest and advanced technology 
has made such projects more efficient and effective.
  --Embrace technology and invest in effective green infrastructure 
        projects including water conservation, fish passage, efficiency 
        technologies, and habitat restoration.
  --Identify and expand hydropower opportunities to support energy 
        independence and carbon emissions reduction.
    We welcome the opportunity to work with you and support your 
efforts to provide a significant increase of funding to Reclamation and 
the USACE.
    Thank you for your consideration and your attention to the 
importance of our nation&#x27;s water infrastructure. Please do not hesitate 
to contact me at ilyle@nwra.org if you would like any additional 
information. Thank you again for your dedication to our nation and its 
water infrastructure.
    Respectfully.

    [This statement was submitted by Ian Lyle, Executive Vice 
President, National Water Resources Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
              Prepared Statement of The Nature Conservancy
    Chairman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy and members of the 
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present The Nature 
Conservancy&#x27;s (TNC&#x27;s) testimony on fiscal year 2022 (FY22) 
appropriations for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps), Bureau of 
Reclamation (Reclamation) and Department of Energy (DOE). TNC 
respectfully requests the Subcommittee&#x27;s support for programs and 
investments needed to ensure the economic and environmental benefits of 
this work are enhanced today and made sustainable for tomorrow.
                      u.s. army corps of engineers
    Chesapeake Bay Oyster Recovery: Ongoing oyster restoration work has 
functionally restored several tributaries in Virginia and Maryland, 
demonstrating that strong partnerships between private, state and 
federal agencies can accomplish tangible outcomes in the Chesapeake 
Bay. TNC supports the administration&#x27;s FY22 budget request of $3.88 
million to continue the essential work of restoring the eastern oyster.
    Claiborne and Millers Ferry Locks and Dams (Fish Passage) Study, 
Lower Alabama River: The Claiborne and Millers Ferry locks and dams 
were built in the 1950s and 1960s to ease navigation and produce 
hydropower on the Alabama River. They also expanded recreational 
opportunities along the river. Unfortunately, they became major 
roadblocks for species that migrate up the Alabama River and into the 
Cahaba River. This study, for which TNC is the non-federal sponsor, 
will examine options for ecologically reconnecting the rivers. TNC 
supports the administration&#x27;s FY22 budget request of $600,000 for the 
study.
    Engineering With Nature (EWN): The Corps&#x27; EWN initiative is using a 
collaborative, science-based approach to better deliver a full range of 
economic, social and environmental benefits from the Corps&#x27; water 
resources infrastructure. It is also leading work to share, train and 
support Corps districts and other partners on how to effectively 
develop nature-based projects. Its innovative approaches are building 
stronger, more resilient communities and a healthier environment. TNC 
was pleased Congress created a new budget line for EWN in FY21 
appropriations. TNC urges the Subcommittee to maintain funding for EWN 
at $12.5 million.
    Hatchie/Loosahatchie Habitat Restoration Study (Tennessee and 
Arkansas): The Lower Mississippi River supports diverse fish and 
wildlife populations as well as outdoor recreation opportunities, yet 
it has access to just 10 percent its original floodplain. Ecological 
restoration can improve fish and wildlife habitat, facilitate 
groundwater infiltration and nutrient processing and provide 
recreational opportunities without negatively impacting flood risk 
management and navigation. This study is an important start in that 
effort. TNC supports the FY22 budget request of $600,000 for the study.
    Navigation and Ecosystem Sustainability Program (NESP): NESP is an 
important, dual-purpose program that allows the Corps to address both 
navigation and ecosystem restoration in an integrated approach along 
the upper Mississippi and Illinois rivers. Past committee support led 
to $5 million in pre-construction engineering and design (PED) funding 
in the Corps&#x27; FY21 work plan. TNC requests the Subcommittee include 
$22.5 million for NESP in FY22 and the authority to begin construction 
to continue this important work and advance the program&#x27;s navigation 
and ecosystem restoration benefits.
    St. Louis Riverfront-Meramec River Basin Ecosystem Restoration: The 
Meramec River basin of central Missouri is among the most biologically 
significant river basins in North America. It contains diverse and rare 
aquatic and terrestrial species, including six species of endangered 
mussels. The Corps has completed an ecosystem restoration feasibility 
study of critical restoration projects within the Meramec River basin, 
which Congress authorized for construction in the Water Resource 
Development Act of 2020. TNC requests $1.4 million for PED for the 
project in FY22.
    Sustainable Rivers Program (SRP): SRP is an initiative to modernize 
the operations of the nation&#x27;s reservoirs to enhance water supply, 
flood protection, hydropower generation and recreation while restoring 
critical ecosystems and the economically valuable services they 
provide. The challenges related to providing water supply and flood 
protection are growing and will only increase due to climate change. 
SRP works collaboratively with local communities, water stakeholders, 
states and other federal agencies to update decades-old water 
management practices to better meet society&#x27;s needs. With increased 
funding in FY20 and FY21, the Corps has been able to significantly 
expand the program from 16 rivers encompassing 66 reservoirs and 5,083 
downstream river miles to 36 rivers encompassing 78 reservoirs, 10,114 
downstream river miles in addition to new water infrastructure like 
locks and dams. TNC requests maintaining funding at $5 million for the 
SRP in FY22.
    Upper Mississippi River Restoration (UMRR) Program: UMRR supports 
coordinated habitat rehabilitation and enhancement projects and 
monitoring for the upper Mississippi River system. Thirty years of 
successful partnership has completed more than 56 projects benefiting 
more than 107,000 acres of aquatic and floodplain habitat. Completion 
of new projects in the pipeline will benefit an additional 75,000 acres 
of aquatic and floodplain habitat. TNC supports full authorized funding 
of $55 million for UMRR in FY22.
                         bureau of reclamation
    Cooperative Watershed Management Program: This program helps 
diverse water interests throughout a watershed--tribes, local and state 
governments, landowners, farmers and ranchers, and nongovernmental 
organizations--work collaboratively to develop regional, multi-benefit 
water solutions. Applicants can use funding through Phase 1 of the 
program to help communities form watershed groups to assess and develop 
projects that respond to community water needs, and they can use 
funding through Phase 2 to help fund those projects. With so many 
successful Phase 1 groups now ready with plans and projects, TNC 
requests full funding for the Cooperative Watershed Management program 
at $20 million in FY22.
    Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery and San Juan River 
Basin Recovery Programs: These programs take a balanced approach to 
recovering four endangered fish species by implementing a range of 
basin-wide strategies and provide Endangered Species Act compliance for 
more than 2,500 water projects. TNC requests full funding for these 
programs, including $5.7 million in the FY22 budget request for capital 
construction activities through the Upper Colorado Region&#x27;s Endangered 
Species Recovery Implementation Program. TNC also appreciates the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s efforts since FY19 to fund environmental programs for 
the Colorado River at $21.4 million, a portion of which supports the 
Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery Program and San Juan 
River Basin Recovery Implementation Program. TNC requests continued 
funding for these activities in FY22.
    WaterSMART Program: The WaterSMART Program has new authority this 
year to award grants to non-profit organizations working with 
traditional grant recipients, provide higher levels of match for multi-
purpose projects and support nature-based solutions. These changes will 
help prioritize projects that both enhance water delivery reliability 
and benefit watershed health. Nevertheless, TNC remains concerned that 
some projects funded through WaterSMART grants can increase consumptive 
use of water, which makes water shortages worse. TNC appreciates the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s past attention to the program and requests continued 
oversight by again including report language similar to report language 
accompanying FY21 appropriations and directing Reclamation to 
prioritize multi-benefit projects, including such projects that 
incorporate nature-based strategies.
                       u.s. department of energy
    TNC supports robust funding for multiple DOE programs that 
accelerate the advancement of clean energy technologies and facilitate 
the department&#x27;s shift in focus towards decarbonization of the U.S. 
economy. This includes programs that were created or reauthorized by 
the Energy Act of 2020.
    Advanced Research Projects Agency--Energy (ARPA-E): ARPA-E is an 
innovative and successful program supporting ``high-risk, high-reward&#x27;&#x27; 
research that has the potential to drastically alter how the United 
States makes and uses energy in the future. TNC requests at least $500 
million in FY22.
    Solar and Wind Energy Technologies: TNC requests strong funding for 
overall research, development and deployment mission of these critical 
energy technology offices, including at least $370 million for the 
Solar Technology Office and at least $180 million for the Wind 
Technology Office. TNC also requests that the following report language 
be included:
    The Committee provides no less than $30,000,000 for technology 
development, testing and verification of technologies and other 
research that help on- and offshore wind energy projects avoid, 
minimize and mitigate impacts on wildlife and habitat. The department&#x27;s 
efforts should include technologies that enable near real-time 
monitoring and mitigation system for large whales, technologies that 
enable and improve scientific research into wind-wildlife interactions, 
research on how to site wind to avoid impacts to the most sensitive 
wildlife and habitat and research and demonstration projects to remove 
barriers to adoption of wind technology on previously disturbed lands 
such as landfills and former mines.
    The Committee provides no less than $40,000,000 for technology 
development, testing and verification of technologies and other 
research that help solar energy projects avoid, minimize and mitigate 
impacts on wildlife and habitat, including through improved scientific 
research into avian-solar interactions, siting solar to avoid impacts 
to the most sensitive wildlife and habitat and research and 
demonstration projects to remove barriers to adoption of solar 
technology on previously disturbed lands such as landfills and former 
mines.
    Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP) and State Energy Program 
(SEP): Together, WAP and SEP provides critical funds to improve energy 
efficiency across the country, with both programs found to provide at 
least $4 in benefits for every federal dollar spent. TNC requests at 
least $350 million in FY22 for WAP and $70 million for SEP. We would 
also support additional funding for Challenge Grants as a supplement to 
SEP as outlined in the president&#x27;s FY22 budget request.
    Industrial Emissions Reduction Technology Development Program: TNC 
supports robust funding for this new program created under the Clean 
Industrial Technology Act to help accelerate reductions in emissions 
from industrial processes and manufacturing. That includes a specific 
request of $80 million in FY22 for demonstration projects, as 
authorized.
    Advanced Nuclear Energy: TNC requests at least $405 million for the 
existing Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program and $33.075 million for 
the new Advanced Nuclear Fuel Availability Program as established by 
the Energy Act of 2020.
    Carbon Capture, Utilization, Storage and Removal: TNC supports 
robust funding for the Office of Fossil Energy to deploy carbon 
management technologies. That includes a request of $871.3 million for 
carbon capture program. Within that, $225 million should be allocated 
to pilot projects, $500 million to demonstration projects and $50 
million to support FEED studies. TNC also requests $200 million for the 
carbon storage program and $55.25 million for carbon utilization. TNC 
supports appropriations of at least $252.5 million across multiple 
offices for RD&amp;D related to carbon removal, including $115 million for 
the DAC prizes and $63.5 million for the carbon dioxide removal program 
established in Title V of the Energy Act of 2020.
    Energy Storage: TNC requests at least $150 million in FY22 to 
support DOE&#x27;s Energy Storage Grand Challenge, including $100 million 
for the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy and $50 
million for the Office of Electricity.
    Advanced Vehicle Technologies: TNC supports robust funding to help 
advance the decarbonization of the transportation sector or the 
development of new zero-carbon fuels for transportation and other end 
uses. TNC requests at least $494 million for the Vehicle Technologies 
Office and $200 million of the Office of Hydrogen and Fuel Cell 
Technologies.
    Thank you for this opportunity to submit TNC&#x27;s recommendations for 
the FY22 Energy and Water Development Appropriations Bill.

    [This statement was submitted by Jimmy Hague, Senior Water Policy 
Advisor, The Nature Conservancy.]
                                 ______
                                 
       Prepared Statement of the Nuclear Waste Strategy Coalition
    The NWSC is an ad hoc organization representing the collective 
interests of member state utility regulators, consumer advocates, 
attorneys general, and radiation control officials; tribal governments; 
local governments; electric utilities with operating and/or shutdown 
nuclear reactors; and other experts on nuclear waste policy matters. We 
call upon Congress to appropriate funds in Fiscal Year 2022 to the 
Department of Energy (DOE) and Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) such 
that each agency has the sustainable annual funding necessary to 
undertake critical activities related to their respective roles in 
developing, managing, and regulating an integrated program for the 
storage, transportation, and disposal of the nation&#x27;s spent nuclear 
fuel (SNF), Greater-Than-Class C (GTCC) waste, and other high-level 
radioactive waste (HLW). For DOE, these programs include:
  --Office of Nuclear Energy (NE) Integrated Waste Management Systems 
        (IWMS) activities;
  --NE Used Nuclear Fuel Disposition Research &amp; Development activities;
  --``Nuclear Waste Disposal&#x27;&#x27; activities per the FY 2021 Consolidated 
        Appropriations Act; and
  --Activities necessary to develop and manage a national integrated 
        nuclear waste program, including establishment of and support 
        for an office dedicated to nuclear waste management.
    For the NRC, that entails funding for activities necessary to 
ensure the safety of a national integrated nuclear waste program, 
including storage, transportation, and disposal of SNF and GTCC waste 
from commercial nuclear power production. As a general matter, 
direction to both agencies concerning these matters remains unclear, 
and despite Congressional appropriations of a new $27.5 million to DOE 
in FY 2021 for ``expenses necessary for nuclear waste disposal 
activities to carry out the purposes of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 
1982, Public Law 97-425, as amended, including interim storage 
activities,&#x27;&#x27; this funding did not establish the meaningful integrated 
nuclear waste management program that our nation needs and that we have 
gone without for more than a decade. Thus, our testimony focuses on the 
need for Congress to both appropriate funds for such an integrated 
program and to provide sustainable annual access to the Nuclear Waste 
Fund (NWF). It also highlights our concerns with prior Senate-proposed 
EWD language and our opposition to reinstatement of a uranium 
enrichment decontamination and decommissioning (D&amp;D) tax.
            existing challenges to nuclear waste management
    The national nuclear waste management program established under the 
1982 Nuclear Waste Policy Act (NWPA) was effectively terminated more 
than a decade ago by executive action. Subsequently, Congress has 
failed to provide meaningful direction or funding for that program or 
any national integrated nuclear waste management program. Since 1983, 
approximately $54 billion has been credited to the NWF, including over 
$21 billion collected from electric ratepayers and over $28 billion in 
interest that continues to accumulate at a rate of over $1.7 billion a 
year. The approximately $43 billion balance sits stranded in U.S. 
Treasury Securities and unappropriated for its intended purpose. These 
facts have resulted in a de facto national policy of inaction that 
negatively impacts:
  --Host States &amp; Communities. The de facto policy indefinitely strands 
        80,000 metric tons of commercial SNF and HLW at operating and 
        decommissioned reactor sites in 34 states without their 
        consent. At shutdown sites, the stranded waste impedes the 
        potential beneficial reuse of the property (e.g., conservation, 
        economic development).
  --All U.S. Taxpayers. The de facto policy already has cost U.S. 
        taxpayers more than $8.6 billion, and this liability is growing 
        by approximately $2 million per day, money that could be used 
        for infrastructure and other purposes.
  --Electric Customers. While no longer paying fees into the federal 
        NWF per court order, electric ratepayers in more than 40 states 
        paid billions of dollars that are not being used for their 
        intended purpose.
                call for action &amp; specific ewd requests
    The federal government can and should establish a national 
integrated nuclear waste management program and simultaneously reform 
the federal budgetary treatment of the NWF to provide sustainable 
annual access to the $43 billion balance and the accumulating future 
interest. This action is needed now to avoid permanently stranding this 
material in host states and communities; address the negative economic 
impacts to states, communities, and taxpayers; and enable the federal 
government to meet its statutory and contractual obligations to 
electric customers under a law established nearly 40 years ago.
    Specifically, the NWSC requests that Congress:
  --Support reforms of the federal budgetary treatment of the NWF such 
        that sustainable annual access is provided to the funds 
        collected from electric customers to support the development 
        and management of a national integrated nuclear waste storage, 
        transportation, and disposal program.
  --Fund establishment of a national integrated nuclear waste 
        management program, including:
    --A dedicated office in DOE that reports directly to the Secretary 
            and focuses on nuclear waste management. A dedicated 
            nuclear waste management office would provide a focal point 
            for SNF and HLW work, facilitate necessary engagement with 
            external stakeholders, and demonstrate an intent and 
            commitment to take meaningful action. Congress has 
            previously recognized the importance of a single-purpose 
            entity that reports to the Secretary, and such an office 
            would benefit external stakeholders and DOE&#x27;s workforce. 
            Whether coordinating with private entities on proposed 
            consolidated interim storage (CIS) facilities; interacting 
            with states and communities potentially interested in 
            hosting a nuclear waste management facility; or managing 
            future Congressional directives regarding the nation&#x27;s 
            nuclear waste, there are substantial tasks that can be 
            pursued now, and DOE needs a dedicated team to focus on 
            these issues and meet with interested and affected parties.
    --Simultaneous pursuit of permanent disposal and a CIS pilot with 
            priority for SNF from shutdown reactors. Because permanent 
            disposal is necessary and a determination on the Yucca 
            Mountain license application is necessary to move forward 
            on permanent disposal, Congress should provide both NRC and 
            DOE the funds necessary to resume their respective roles in 
            the license review. Simultaneously, Congress should provide 
            DOE funds to facilitate private or federal efforts to site 
            a pilot CIS facility with priority for waste stranded at 
            shutdown commercial nuclear power plant sites, and Congress 
            should provide NRC funds to carry out licensing activities 
            pertaining to such CIS facilities.
    --Continuation and expansion of constructive initiatives related to 
            transportation infrastructure. Congress should fund work at 
            federal agencies that facilitates SNF transportation, as it 
            will be necessary regardless of destination. For example, 
            the assessment of transportation infrastructure needs at 
            shutdown plant sites and the testing, certification, and 
            procurement of railcars and licensed transportation 
            containers and components in sufficient quantities are 
            constructive activities that should continue.
    --Increased financial and technical assistance to tribal, state, 
            and local governments. Such assistance for transportation-
            related emergency preparedness training and activities will 
            provide the public greater assurance that the health, 
            safety, and welfare of its communities will be preserved 
            during SNF transport.
  --Communicate to DOE that it is time to pursue measures beyond 
        information-gathering and reports, particularly on topics that 
        have been sufficiently examined by the Blue Ribbon Commission 
        on America&#x27;s Nuclear Future, the U.S. Government Accountability 
        Office, et al.
    We urge the Committee to address these items in its markup as a 
critical step and urge Congress to restructure the funding and spending 
mechanisms for the NWF to provide the necessary funding certainty to 
implement an integrated nuclear waste management program over multiple 
decades. This should include sustainable access to the NWF while 
maintaining Congressional oversight of the program&#x27;s progress. These 
actions would demonstrate that Congress is committed to ensuring that 
the federal government carries out its statutory and contractual 
responsibilities.
         concerns with prior senate ewd appropriations language
    The NWSC has previously communicated concerns with certain Senate-
proposed provisions (e.g., Section 306 of S. 2470, 116th Cong., 2019). 
First, such language would fail to move forward on CIS and permanent 
disposal in parallel, a key element of a successful integrated nuclear 
waste management program. Second, establishment of specific consent-
based siting requirements by statute is not necessary, as potential 
hosts should have the flexibility to negotiate the process and 
conditions that best serve the interests of their jurisdictions. Third, 
it would not address underlying funding concerns while expanding 
Congressional authority to tap the NWF and increase the potential for 
restarting the fee on electric customers. Finally, such language raised 
consequential questions about whether DOE will be allowed to engage 
either federal or private initiatives to facilitate CIS and whether 
access to the CIS may be limited.
    Having reiterated concerns with previous language, the NWSC greatly 
appreciates the EWD Subcommittee&#x27;s focus on these important issues. 
Additionally, we seek an opportunity to engage further with your team 
on alternative approaches for making meaningful progress toward 
establishment of a national integrated nuclear waste management 
program.
     uranium enrichment decontamination &amp; decommissioning (d&amp;d) tax
    NWSC opposes reinstatement of a uranium enrichment D&amp;D tax. 
Although supportive of environmental cleanup of enrichment sites, U.S. 
nuclear-generating utilities and their customers should not be singled 
out again to pay for D&amp;D of DOE facilities developed for national 
defense.
                                closing
    On behalf of the NWSC, we appreciate this opportunity, welcome 
further engagement, and respectfully request that Congress address 
these issues in a process with robust stakeholder input.

    [This statement was submitted by Katrina McMurrian, Executive 
Director, 
Nuclear Waste Strategy Coalition.]
                                 ______
                                 
       Prepared Statement of the Oregon Water Resources Congress
    The Oregon Water Resources Congress (OWRC) has been concerned over 
the last several years about reductions to the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers (USACE) Civil Works budget and is supportive the President&#x27;s 
Proposed FY 2022 Budget requesting increased appropriations for this 
program at $6.8 billion. The USACE Civil Works program addresses vital 
water resource needs throughout the nation, and in Oregon, the USACE 
Northwestern Division operates on our two largest river systems, the 
Columbia River, and the Willamette River, as well as maintaining 
Oregon&#x27;s coastal rivers for navigation. Increased funding would help 
support and leverage collaborative state level planning efforts by 
USACE in Oregon and nationwide. A tangible example of the need is the 
impending reallocation of water resources among USACE&#x27;s thirteen Oregon 
reservoirs among agricultural, municipal, and environmental uses.
    OWRC was established in 1912 as a trade association to support the 
protection of water rights and promote the wise stewardship of water 
resources statewide. OWRC members are local governmental entities, 
which include irrigation districts, water control districts, drainage 
districts, water improvement districts, and other agricultural water 
suppliers that deliver water to roughly 1/3 of all irrigated land in 
Oregon. These water stewards operate and manage complex water 
management systems, including water supply reservoirs, canals, 
pipelines, and hydropower facilities.
    Our members across Oregon face challenges related to irrigation 
water supply, reliability, and aging infrastructure. While there are 
common concerns and interests throughout irrigated agriculture, each 
basin is unique, and necessitates local communities working together to 
identify needs and developing solutions to best meet them. The two 
largest river systems in Oregon (the Columbia River and the Willamette 
River) are managed by USACE and play a vital role in providing not only 
water supplies for agriculture, but also ports and passage for 
transporting food and fiber globally, flood protection for communities, 
fish and wildlife benefits, hydropower production, and recreation. 
Additional funding for the Civil Works budget is needed to ensure USACE 
has the necessary resources to meet the myriad of infrastructure needs 
of those systems, without placing the entire burden on the backs of the 
farmers and ranchers who produce food and fiber for our nation.
                         fy2022 appropriations
    We recognize we must make strategic investments with scarce 
resources. The USACE Civil Works program is a perfect example of a 
budget that should have funding increased because the water 
infrastructure it encompasses directly contributes to the economy as 
well protecting public safety and the environment. OWRC feels strongly 
USACE needs substantially increased funding to provide critical repairs 
on our nation&#x27;s aging water infrastructure to prevent catastrophic 
failure, as well as address routine operations and maintenance on other 
infrastructure before it becomes irreparable.
                    willamette basin reservoir study
    The Portland District of the USACE Northwestern Division operates 
thirteen dams and reservoirs in the Willamette Basin, with a combined 
storage capacity of over 1.6 million acre-feet. The dams were 
constructed primarily to protect downstream communities from flooding 
but also store and release water for irrigation, hydropower generation, 
water quality, fish and wildlife flows, and recreation. Since the 
construction of the dams started in the 1930s, Oregon has seen a 
dramatic increase in population, which in turn has spurred increased 
development, agriculture, and a whole host of new demands on the 
reservoirs. Municipal water entities would like access to available 
stored water to better meet drinking water needs for growing 
communities as well as businesses such as the high-tech industry. 
Additionally, there are fish and wildlife species in the river system 
listed under the Endangered Species Act and related ecosystem 
restoration needs not contemplated when the facilities were 
constructed.
    Following years of stakeholder engagement, the Willamette Basin 
Reservoir Study has been finalized and but there is still significant 
work that needs to occur before any reallocation can occur. It is 
crucial that ACOE remains at the table and collaboratively works with 
state agencies and stakeholders to flush out various details needed to 
determine how the reservoirs can best help meet the myriad of current 
and future water demands in the Willamette Basin. OWRC would like to 
see continued funding to support ongoing efforts related to the 
implementation of the Willamette Reallocation included in the USACE 
Civil Works FY 2022 budget to support this important effort.
                      additional funding programs
    OWRC is encouraged by the recent additions to the USACE Civil Works 
program including funding for climate change response and resiliency, 
dam safety and earthquake hazard reduction; however, programs as 
important as these should receive even more funding. Additional funding 
is needed to support and leverage state efforts to identify and address 
earthquake hazards. Oregon faces the risk of a catastrophic earthquake 
from the Cascadia Subduction Zone and the state is in the early stages 
of planning and mitigating to improve seismic resiliency. It is 
uncertain when or how devastating the earthquake could be, but it is 
clear there would be broad impacts, particularly since most 
infrastructure was constructed prior to the discovery of the fault and 
does not meet current seismic standards.
    Aging water infrastructure is particularly vulnerable and there is 
a significant need for financial and technical assistance to upgrade 
reservoirs and other key facilities. Without increased earthquake 
preparedness and dam safety funding, Oregon cannot mitigate the 
potential damage. We encourage the House to further fund these programs 
to effectively prepare the states for earthquakes and prevent 
widespread devastation to people and property.
    Additionally, like many other western states, Oregon has been 
experiencing more frequent and severe drought conditions. For Oregon, 
the drought stems from a lack of snowpack that serves as the natural 
water storage throughout the year for many farms, communities, and fish 
and wildlife. The impacts may take longer to show, but drought can be 
as devastating as earthquakes, hurricanes, and other natural disasters.
    Impacts from prolonged drought take time to recover from and like 
other natural disasters, the best way to survive and help communities 
recover is through coordinated planning and developing diverse tools to 
use when these crises occur. We know from our experience working with 
our state agency and partner organizations in Oregon that funding for 
planning, feasibility, and implementation of projects to increase 
drought preparedness and resiliency is a cornerstone to an 
economically, socially, and environmentally sound approach for a 
sustainable water future.
    In conclusion, we wholeheartedly support the proposed appropriation 
of at least $6.8 billion for the USACE Civil Works budget for FY 2022. 
The critical nature of the water infrastructure services the USACE 
provides requires a budget that matches the seriousness of the national 
need, and the importance of the water supply, navigation, public 
safety, and other natural resources benefits it provides. Thank you for 
the opportunity to provide testimony regarding the FY 2022 budget for 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by April Snell, Executive Director, 
Oregon Water Resources Congress.]
                                 ______
                                 
               Prepared Statement of Pearl Certification
    As a national market leader in residential energy efficiency 
certification, Pearl Certification (``Pearl&#x27;&#x27;) respectfully urges your 
support, through the Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Energy and Water Development 
Appropriations bill, to provide robust funding to advance programs at 
the Department of Energy (DOE) that invest in residential energy 
efficiency and whole-house initiatives. The President&#x27;s FY 2022 budget 
request makes significant investments in the Weatherization Assistance 
Program, State Energy Program, and Building Technologies Office. For 
the many reasons detailed below, we urge Congress to continue support 
for these programs and work to ensure that sub accounts within the DOE 
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy are robustly funded so 
that their important work may continue and expand.
    Pearl provides third-party certification of high-performing homes; 
homes that are healthy, comfortable, resilient, and energy efficient. 
Pearl&#x27;s certification drives demand for these improvements by making 
them visible at time of appraisal, sale, and/or refinance, allowing 
their full value to be captured in the sale price. The Pearl 
Certification is designed to fill a gap that has existed in the 
residential marketplace by helping consumers find and sell high-
performing homes with an easy-to-use, contractor-friendly certification 
system that creates an inventory of the home&#x27;s energy efficiency, 
health, comfort, resilience and other ``high-performing&#x27;&#x27; assets.\1\ 
Pearl has created networks of elite contractors and real estate 
brokers: market leaders who provide high quality goods and services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The Pearl system provides homeowners, homebuyers, real estate 
agents, appraisers, and underwriters with different and complementary 
information that meets their need to understand and value the home&#x27;s 
features. New and existing homes can earn a Pearl certification, and 
the home&#x27;s record and Pearl score can be updated as further 
improvements are made. The report that accompanies a Pearl 
certification includes detailed information on ways that the home&#x27;s 
assets impact its comfort, indoor air quality, and energy consumption. 
Contractors also use the scoring system as an educational tool to help 
homeowners understand the benefits of high-performing equipment and 
services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    With paying customers in over twenty states, Pearl has scored over 
65,000 homes to date. Pearl is the only market-based firm approved by 
the Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Energy to 
administer their Home Performance with ENERGY STAR(r) program for 
existing homes, and was accepted into the 2017 National Association of 
REALTORS(r) (NAR) prestigious REACH Technology Accelerator. Pearl&#x27;s 
current pilot partnership with NYSERDA positions Pearl&#x27;s certification 
system as a voluntary home labeling system which will help states and 
municipalities meet carbon reduction goals.
    Dollar for dollar, investments in energy efficiency create more 
jobs than investment in the utility sector or fossil-fuels.\2\ As a 
result, investments in DOE programs that support energy efficiency--
like those in the Building Technologies Office--lead to job creation 
and economic growth. In fact, energy efficiency is the largest employer 
and fastest growing sector in the energy industry. The 2020 ``Energy 
Efficiency Jobs in America&#x27;&#x27; \3\ report from E4TheFuture found that, 
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the energy efficiency industry employed 
nearly 2.4 million Americans and was adding more jobs than any other 
energy sector. The industry was expected to see another 3% growth in 
2020. Instead, over 18% of the energy efficiency workforce (430,000 
workers) lost their jobs in the initial months of the pandemic. While 
other sectors experienced robust recoveries in the second half of 2020, 
energy efficiency did not: In December 2020, over half of energy 
efficiency workers laid off in the spring (230,000) were still out of 
work.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ ACEEE. N.d. Energy Efficiency and Economic Opportunity. 
Retrieved from http://aceee.org/files/pdf/fact-sheet/ee-economic-
opportunity.pdf.
    \3\ https://e4thefuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/
EE_Jobs_America_2020.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The residential buildings sector remains a largely untapped 
resource for carbon reduction goals. Residential buildings account for 
21% of total U.S. energy consumption,\4\ consume more electricity than 
any other sector,\5\ and are the largest contributor to peak demand,\6\ 
all of which make this sector particularly important from a carbon 
emissions reduction standpoint. In addition, the occupants of the vast 
majority of homes in the U.S. experience comfort problems, health 
issues, and/or high utility bills. The residential sector&#x27;s energy 
consumption can be significantly reduced, and other related problems 
addressed, through single-measure and whole-house upgrades. Residential 
energy efficiency jobs were hit particularly hard by the pandemic and 
statewide lockdown orders. Supporting these jobs as part of our 
nation&#x27;s recovery will be critical.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/mer.pdf.
    \5\ https://www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/html/epa_01_02.html.
    \6\ https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/04/f61/bto-
geb_overview-4.15.19.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) at DOE 
has advanced innovative technology solutions and helped identify the 
most effective means to increase buildings&#x27; energy efficiency in order 
to reduce carbon emissions through research, development, field 
validation, deployment, demonstration, consumer education, and 
technical assistance activities. To ensure that these innovative energy 
technologies, practices, and information can be fully utilized by 
American consumers to reduce carbon emissions, Congress should support 
coordination with the private sector and support demonstration and 
deployment activities that integrate and bring these solutions to 
market.
    Residential energy efficiency programs at the Department of Energy 
deserve the support of the American taxpayer as these programs are 
proven to provide a significant return on investment. When funded they 
will continue to provide energy cost relief to households, support 
American-based industry and American jobs, ameliorate issues with the 
aging electrical grid, and support national security goals. We also 
urge additional funding either through regular appropriations or 
supplemental funding in the event an energy/infrastructure package is 
considered. In the event that opportunity presents itself, we would 
urge funding for the HOPE for HOMES program to advance workforce 
training and residential retrofit rebates supported by the President&#x27;s 
Budget Request ($2 billion in FY22).
    We respectfully urge funding of $80M for the Residential Building 
Integration program within the Building Technologies Office, which has 
the capacity to fundamentally transform the performance of homes and 
greatly improve the energy efficiency in the 115 million existing 
residential buildings throughout this country. Residential buildings 
account for 21% of total U.S. energy consumption, use more electricity 
than any other sector, and are therefore an essential (albeit often 
overlooked) part of the carbon reduction equation. RBI can 
significantly improve the energy efficiency in the residential sector 
through its partnerships with the thousands of small businesses in this 
sector, the construction trades, equipment, smart grid technology and 
systems suppliers, integrators and state and local governments.
    Home Performance with ENERGY STAR, which advances contractor 
engagement in high efficiency equipment installations, is just one 
example of a crucial residential program within RBI. To date, 
approximately 875,000 energy efficiency improvement projects have been 
completed on existing homes through the Home Performance with ENERGY 
STAR program. We recommend that this program receive a line item in the 
budget for at least $80 million and that the funding be focused on 
facilitating later-stage research, demonstration, and widespread 
deployment of technology solutions in new and existing homes, with an 
emphasis on whole-house energy efficiency retrofits (including 
outreach, engagement and training to private sector contractors) and 
continuing efforts to advance grid-interactive residential buildings 
and smart home technology.
    We encourage the direct engagement with residential contractors and 
home certification businesses, which are crucial to the success of 
buildings programs. We also urge continued efforts to address 
visibility of high performing features in residential buildings as a 
way to ensure that they are properly valued and to create market 
incentives to drive additional improvements. RBI deserves the support 
of the American taxpayer as it is proven to provide a significant 
return on investment and provide economic, health, resiliency, and 
carbon reduction benefits. Again, we respectfully urge Congress to fund 
Residential Building Integration at no less than $80 million.
    DOE&#x27;s residential energy efficiency programs and initiatives are 
critical to the continued advancement of the energy efficiency 
industry, which contributes to the country&#x27;s overall economic growth, 
energy independence, and international competitiveness, and also 
represents a significant and largely untapped resource for carbon 
reduction. We once again urge Congress to support these programs with 
robust funding for FY22 so they may continue their important work, 
including continued efforts to address property rating and valuation in 
buildings. Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony. We look 
forward to working with you.

    [This statement was submitted by Robin LeBaron, Co-Founder, 
President and COO, Pearl Certification.]
                                 ______
                                 
            Prepared Statement of San Juan Water Commission
    We are requesting your support for appropriations in the 
President&#x27;s recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of 
Reclamation, Upper Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River 
Endangered Fish Recovery Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery 
Implementation Program. The budget items and amounts requested in the 
President&#x27;s budget for these programs are described below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmers Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the San 
Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    I appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Aaron Chavez, Executive Director, 
San Juan Water Commission.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the Society for Industrial and Applied 
                              Mathematics
    This written testimony is submitted on behalf of the Society for 
Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) to ask you to continue your 
support of the Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science with 
funding of $7.7 billion in fiscal year (FY) 2022. In particular, we 
urge you to provide at least $292 million for Mathematical, 
Computational, and Computer Sciences Research in the Office of Advanced 
Scientific Computing Research (ASCR) within the Office of Science. We 
also emphasize the importance of support for graduate students through 
the Computational Sciences Graduate Fellowship and request that $20 
million be provided in FY 2022.
    On behalf of SIAM, we submit this written testimony for the record 
to the Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development Appropriations of 
the United States Senate.
    SIAM has approximately 14,000 members, including applied and 
computational mathematicians, computer scientists, numerical analysts, 
engineers, statisticians, and mathematics educators. They work in 
industrial and service organizations, universities, colleges, and 
government agencies and laboratories all over the world. In addition, 
SIAM has over 500 institutional members-colleges, universities, 
corporations, and research organizations. SIAM members come from many 
different disciplines but have a common interest in applying 
mathematics in partnership with computational science towards solving 
real-world problems.
    SIAM appreciates your Committee&#x27;s leadership on and recognition of 
the critical role of the Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science 
and its support for mathematics, science, and engineering in enabling a 
strong U.S. economy, workforce, and society. DOE was one of the first 
federal agencies to champion computational science as one of the three 
pillars of science, along with theory and experiment, and SIAM deeply 
appreciates and values DOE activities.
    SIAM is grateful for the strong funding that the Office of Science 
received in FY 2021 and encouraged by the proposed increases in the 
President&#x27;s FY 2022 budget request. We join with the research community 
to request that you continue this momentum by providing the Office of 
Science with $7.7 billion for FY 2022. The requested amount is 
necessary for ensuring continued support for areas such as mathematics 
and scientific research to help address national priorities, foster 
economic growth, and create jobs.
                 advanced scientific computing research
    Activities within the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing 
Research (ASCR) play a key role in supporting research that begins to 
fulfill the needs described above. Within the overall amount for ASCR, 
we urge you to provide at least $292 million for Mathematical, 
Computational, and Computer Sciences Research in FY 2022. SIAM applauds 
the proposed increases in the President&#x27;s budget request as this level 
of funding is needed to ensure the long-term health and viability of 
the high-performance computing (HPC) ecosystem that DOE relies on for 
conducting groundbreaking discovery science while supporting increased 
investment in priority areas such as quantum computing and artificial 
intelligence.
    Core research activities within ASCR enable the development of 
critical tools for computational science, modeling, and data analysis 
that enhance advanced computing capabilities and seed new areas of 
research with potential for revolutionary advancements. Sustained 
investment in basic research ultimately enabled the global leadership 
in HPC that the U.S. currently enjoys. While our strength in HPC is 
exemplified by the groundbreaking exascale systems currently being 
assembled, this position is increasingly being challenged by overseas 
competitors.
    We strongly support ASCR&#x27;s reorientation toward longer term 
research as the Exascale Computing Initiative comes to fruition and 
funding for the associated Exascale Computing Project continues its 
planned decline. This shift is underpinned by strategic visioning 
exercises that have produced several recommendations for reinvigorating 
ASCR&#x27;s research agenda. These include a substantial reinvestment in 
foundational science and increased support for high-risk/high-reward 
research activities, especially at universities.\1\ Such an approach 
will help maintain the long-term viability and vibrancy of the broader 
HPC research community as ASCR looks toward the post-exascale future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Advanced Scientific Computing Advisory Committee (ASCAC), 
Subcommittee on Exascale Transition, ``Transition Report&#x27;&#x27;, https://
science.osti.gov/-/media/ascr/ascac/pdf/meetings/202004/
Transition_Report_202004-
ASCAC.pdf?la=en&amp;hash=5164916FE5158EE8919C26804B4CF7F6
DDA36E9D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In addition to the critical role that it already plays in priority 
areas like artificial intelligence and quantum information science, 
ASCR&#x27;s research portfolio will be a critical asset to the Department&#x27;s 
efforts to drive innovation in climate and Earth systems predictability 
and renewable energy. Specifically, research in applied mathematics and 
computational science will enable new capabilities in environmental 
sensing and edge computing with applications in Earth systems 
prediction and climate forecasting. In addition, advancements in 
modeling, simulation, and optimization can help improve grid 
reliability and the integration of renewable energy sources into the 
broader power distribution system.
        supporting the pipeline of mathematicians and scientists
    SIAM is grateful for the strong support of the Computational 
Sciences Graduate Fellowships (CSGF) and requests that $20 million be 
provided for the Computational Science Graduate Fellowship (CSGF) in FY 
2022 within the overall amount for research. Researchers trained in 
computational science and working in universities, national 
laboratories, and industry are essential to propel advances in many DOE 
critical research areas. This program helps ensure the existence of an 
adequate supply of scientists and engineers with strong computational 
research experience and close ongoing ties to DOE to meet future 
national workforce needs.
    CSGF has been flat-funded at $10 million since FY 2015, even as 
computational techniques continue to permeate every area of science and 
increasingly contribute to the advancement of DOE mission priorities. 
SIAM is pleased to see support for CSGF within the President&#x27;s FY 2022 
budget request to increase the number of fellows in AI and Quantum and 
participation of individuals from under-represented groups. The 
increase we are requesting to CSGF reflects the growing need for an 
expanded workforce in emerging areas of importance to DOE such as 
artificial intelligence and data science. As international competition 
in science and engineering intensifies, maintaining U.S. leadership in 
these areas will increasingly depend on our ability to cultivate a 
scientific workforce with strong research experience and close ties to 
DOE. An increase in funding to CSGF would also enable ASCR to address a 
consistent oversubscription in the program and advance diversity, 
equity, and inclusion through expanded outreach to minority serving 
institutions.
    the role of mathematics in meeting health, energy, and security 
                               challenges
    Support for applied mathematics and computational science is 
critical to sustaining the nation&#x27;s global scientific and technological 
leadership, energy production capabilities, and national security. By 
exploiting DOE&#x27;s world class supercomputing capabilities, 
mathematicians and computational scientists supported by the 
abovementioned programs pioneer new modeling and simulation techniques 
that enable substantial breakthroughs in materials synthesis, energy 
distribution, and human physiology among other complex areas where 
laboratory experiments or field observations are too costly, time 
consuming, or simply insufficient. This was demonstrated recently in 
the midst of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Researchers at Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory (ORNL) developed a computational model of the novel 
coronavirus. They then ran the model on ORNL&#x27;s supercomputer, Summit, 
and were able to identify 77 molecular compounds that could serve as 
the basis for therapeutic drugs to counter COVID-19.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ https://chemrxiv.org/articles/
Repurposing_Therapeutics_for_the_Wuhan_
Coronavirus_nCov-2019_Supercomputer-Based_Docking_to_the_Viral_S--
Protein_and_
Human_ACE2_Interface/11871402/3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               conclusion
    The programs in the Office of Science, particularly those discussed 
above, are important elements of DOE&#x27;s efforts to fulfill its mission. 
They contribute to the goals of dramatically transforming our current 
capabilities to develop new sources of energy and improve energy 
efficiency to ensure energy independence and facilitate DOE&#x27;s effort to 
increase U.S. competitiveness by training and attracting the best 
scientific talent into DOE headquarters and laboratories, the American 
research enterprise, and the clean energy economy.
    Thank you again for your ongoing support of the DOE Office of 
Science. The DOE Office of Science needs sustained annual funding to 
maintain our competitive edge in science and technology, and therefore 
we respectfully ask that you continue your support of these critical 
programs. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the 
Committee on behalf of SIAM and look forward to providing any 
additional information or assistance you may ask of us during the FY 
2022 appropriations process.

    [This statement was submitted by Dr. Susanne C. Brenner, President; 
Dr. Anne Gelb, Vice President for Science Policy; and Dr. Suzanne L. 
Weekes, Executive 
Director, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.]
                                 ______
                                 
          Prepared Statement of the Southern Ute Indian Tribe
    Chairman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and Subcommittee 
members:
    The Southern Ute Indian Tribe requests your support for 
appropriations in the President&#x27;s budget request for FY 2022 to the 
Bureau of Reclamation--Upper Colorado Region for the San Juan River 
Basin Recovery Implementation Program and the Upper Colorado River 
Endangered Fish Recovery Program (``Recovery Programs&#x27;&#x27;).
    The importance of the Recovery Programs cannot be overstated. 
Westerners&#x27; water supply relies on water projects that store, channel, 
and pump water where it is needed. These Recovery Programs were 
established to recover endangered fish species while simultaneously 
allowing water use and development to proceed in compliance with the 
Endangered Species Act. The Recovery Programs provide Endangered 
Species Act compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the 
Upper Colorado River Basin, including every Reclamation project 
upstream of Lake Powell. That includes projects such as the Animas La 
Plata Project in southwest Colorado, where tribes are partners with 
Reclamation. The San Juan Program in particular was critical to the 
settlement of the Southern Ute Indian Tribe&#x27;s water rights and is 
fundamental to future tribal water development.
    The budget items and amounts requested in the President&#x27;s budget 
for these programs are described below.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
include:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and conserve 
        genetic integrity through hatcheries and stocking efforts, 
        manage non-native and sport fish, and research and monitoring 
        to provide the scientific basis to guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities needed 
to recover endangered fish species. This includes $2,500,000 for 
construction of a fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion 
structure on the San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for 
floodplain habitat development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan 
River, $2,550,000 for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at 
the Grand Valley Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River 
near Grand Junction Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program 
Management for contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract 
administration, tracking expenditures, and addressing issues and 
concerns associated with capital project construction.
    These programs have been highly successful in achieving their 
purpose. For example, two of the fish species that the programs were 
designed to recover--the Razorback Sucker and the Humpback Chub--are in 
the process of being downlisted from ``endangered&#x27;&#x27; to ``threatened.&#x27;&#x27; 
The programs are a success not just on the biological front. They are 
also a positive example of the value of cooperation. The partners in 
these programs include four federally recognized Indian tribes (the 
Southern Ute Indian Tribe, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, Jicarilla Apache 
Nation, and Navajo Nation); four states (New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, 
and Wyoming), multiple federal agencies, including the Fish and 
Wildlife Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs; water and power 
interests; and environmental groups. The partners have pooled 
resources--including funding, in-kind donations, and staff--to ensure 
the success of these Programs.
    The Southern Ute Indian Tribe appreciates the Subcommittee&#x27;s past 
support and requests the Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 
funding to ensure the Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial 
participation in and provision of federal cost sharing for these 
vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Melvin J. Baker, Chairman, 
Southern Ute 
Indian Tribe.]
                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of the Southwestern Water Conservation District
    The Southwestern Water Conservation District (SWCD) appreciates the 
opportunity to submit this letter of support for appropriations in the 
President&#x27;s recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of 
Reclamation, Upper Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River 
Endangered Fish Recovery Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery 
Implementation Program. SWCD is a political subdivision of the State 
that was established by the Colorado General Assembly in 1941 to 
protect, conserve, use and develop the water resources of the San Juan 
and Dolores River Basins as well as to safeguard all waters to which 
the state of Colorado is equitably entitled.
    We are requesting your support for appropriations in the 
President&#x27;s budget for these programs described below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes $8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream flows, 
maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and conservation of genetic 
integrity through hatcheries and stocking efforts, manage non-native 
and sport fish, and research and monitoring to provide the scientific 
basis to guide decision making. This funding for the recovery programs 
is authorized by P.L. 106-392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell. Because these objectives align with our statutory mandate, SWCD 
has been a steadfast supporter of the Upper Colorado and San Juan 
Recovery Programs since their inception in 1988 and 1992, respectively.
    I appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Steve Wolff, General Manager, 
Southwestern Water Conservation District.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the Tri-County Water Conservancy District
    The Tri-County Water Conservancy District is requesting your 
support for appropriations in the President&#x27;s recommended budget for FY 
2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper Colorado Region for the Upper 
Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery Program and the San Juan River 
Basin Recovery Implementation Program. The budget items and amounts 
requested in the President&#x27;s budget for these programs are described 
below.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    We appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Mike Berry, General Manager, Tri-
County Water Conservancy District.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish 
 Recovery Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation 
                                Program
    I am requesting your support for appropriations in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region for the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery 
Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation Program. 
The budget items and amounts requested in the President&#x27;s budget for 
these programs are described below.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, power and 
environmental interests. The programs&#x27; objectives are to recover 
endangered fish species while water use and development proceeds in 
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The programs provide ESA 
compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado 
River Basin, including every Reclamation project upstream of Lake 
Powell.
    Endangered Species Programs: The Endangered Species Program also 
provides $5.7 million for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River 
Endangered Fish Recovery programs for construction of facilities need 
to recover endangered fish species: $2,500,000 for construction of a 
fish barrier at the Farmer&#x27;s Mutual Ditch diversion structure on the 
San Juan River in northwest New Mexico, $500,000 for floodplain habitat 
development in northwest New Mexico on the San Juan River, $2,550,000 
for rehabilitation of the fish screen and passage at the Grand Valley 
Irrigation Company diversion on the Colorado River near Grand Junction 
Colorado, and $150,000 for Upper Colorado Program Management for 
contracting, budgeting, reporting, contract administration, tracking 
expenditures, and addressing issues and concerns associated with 
capital project construction.
    Colorado River Compliance Activities: The President&#x27;s budget 
requests $21,400,000 for Colorado River Compliance Activities that 
includes:
  --$8,640,000 for the Upper Colorado and San Juan Endangered Fish 
        Recovery Programs to restore critical habitat, enhance stream 
        flows, maintain fish ladders and screens, augment and 
        conservation of genetic integrity through hatcheries and 
        stocking efforts, manage non-native and sport fish, and 
        research and monitoring to provide the scientific basis to 
        guide decision making.
  --$11,360,000 for the Glen Canyon Adaptive Management Program for 
        scientific investigations, experimentation using Glen Canyon 
        Dam releases and other tasks required to increase understanding 
        of how to operate Glen Canyon Dam to meet statutory 
        requirements, and experimental flow research.
  --$1,400,000 for water quality and consumptive use studies to provide 
        data required to meet legal agreements that regulate the flow 
        and quality of the river and support consumptive use studies of 
        water for municipal, industrial, agricultural uses.
    This funding for the recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-
392, as amended.
    I appreciate the Subcommittee&#x27;s past support and request the 
Subcommittee&#x27;s assistance for fiscal year 2022 funding to ensure the 
Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s continuing financial participation in and 
provision of federal cost sharing for these vitally important programs.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Mike King, Chief External Affairs 
Officer.]
                                 ______
                                 
            Prepared Statement of the WateReuse Association
    Thank you for providing the opportunity to submit written testimony 
on Fiscal Year 2022 appropriations. I write today on behalf of the 
WateReuse Association and its members to highlight the importance of 
the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s (USBR) Title XVI-WIIN Water 
Reclamation and Reuse Competitive Grants Program. The Title XVI-WIIN 
program has helped communities across the West build drought 
resilience, keep nutrients and other pollutants out of sensitive 
waterways, save billions of dollars relative to importing water, and 
grow sustainable economies. It is a key economic and climate resiliency 
tool, but is hamstrung by insufficient funding.
    Given the critical role that water recycling plays in water 
resources management and the overwhelming demand for projects as 
authorized in section 4009(c) of Public Law 114-322, we urge you to 
include at least $100 million for this program in Energy and Water 
Development appropriations legislation for FY 2022.
    The WateReuse Association is a not-for-profit trade association for 
water utilities, businesses, industrial and commercial enterprises, 
non-profit organizations, and research entities that engage in and on 
water recycling. WateReuse and its state and regional sections 
represent more than 200 water utilities serving over 60 million 
customers, and over 300 businesses and organizations across the 
country. Our mission is to engage our members in a movement for safe 
and sustainable water supplies, to promote acceptance and support of 
recycled water, and to advocate for policies and funding that increase 
water reuse.
    The USBR&#x27;s Title XVI program is the only federal program with water 
reuse as its sole focus. Since Title XVI&#x27;s inception in 1992, Congress 
has authorized 53 Title XVI recycling projects producing more than 
400,000 acre-feet of drought-resistant water supply. To date, Congress 
has appropriated over $700 million in federal funding, which has been 
leveraged with non-federal funding to implement more than $3.3 billion 
in water reuse improvements--a nearly 5:1 leverage ratio.
    In 2016, the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation 
(WIIN) Act established a mechanism, colloquially known as Title XVI-
WIIN, to enable new projects to apply for competitive grants within 
Title XVI. Due to the popularity of Title XVI-WIIN in its first few 
years, the program now has a large and growing backlog exceeding $700 
million in federal cost share for eligible projects, and demand is 
expected to grow as more projects become eligible.
    Water projects funded through the Title XVI program have been used 
to increase the supply of fresh drinking water, generate sustainable 
irrigation water for landscaping and agricultural use, restore 
sensitive ecosystems, and help industries expand and create jobs, among 
other purposes. The program is not limited to the reuse of municipal 
wastewater--it also helps communities identify beneficial uses for 
industrial, agricultural, and domestic wastewater, as well as impaired 
ground and surface water. Investments through the Title XVI competitive 
grants program have helped both urban and rural communities across the 
West build a strong and secure economic future.
    A recent GAO report (GAO-19-110) highlighted a number of 
illustrative Title XVI projects. For example, program investments 
helped one drought-stricken water district in California develop 
infrastructure to use more than 2 billion gallons of recycled water to 
irrigate sports fields, golf courses, parks, school grounds, and 
medians. Another project is providing drought-resistant recycled water 
to farmers to irrigate 45,000 acres of farmland, reducing demand on the 
area&#x27;s over-drafted groundwater basin. Other Title XVI projects have 
been used to prevent saltwater intrusion into aquifers, restore 
marshes, wetlands, and other habitat, and create potable drinking 
water.
    In addition to increasing funding for the Title XVI-WIIN program, 
we ask for your support in securing robust funding for USBR&#x27;s 
Desalination and Water Purification Program in FY 2022. The 
Desalination Program invests in projects in Reclamation states that 
involve ocean or brackish water desalination. In the arid West, 
desalination is an important tool that can help communities increase 
their water supply.
    Thank you for considering our requests and please do not hesitate 
to reach out if you have any questions.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Greg Fogel, Policy Director, 
WateReuse 
Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
        Prepared Statement of the Western Governors&#x27; Association
    Chair Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and Members of the 
Subcommittee, the Western Governors&#x27; Association (WGA) appreciates the 
opportunity to provide written testimony on the appropriations and 
activities of the federal agencies under the Subcommittee&#x27;s 
jurisdiction, including the Department of Energy (DOE), Bureau of 
Reclamation (BOR), and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps). WGA is an 
independent organization representing the Governors of the 22 
westernmost states and territories. The Association is an instrument of 
the Governors for bipartisan policy development, information-sharing 
and collective action on issues of critical importance to the western 
United States.
    The agencies within the Subcommittee&#x27;s jurisdiction wield 
significant influence over the American West and the development of 
energy and water resources in the region. Western Governors recognize 
the importance of a close and productive working relationship between 
states and the federal government and understand that more effective 
intergovernmental cooperation depends on federal recognition of states 
as co-sovereigns and partners. The promotion of a greater partnership 
between states and the federal government is central to the mission of 
WGA and is reflected in WGA Policy Resolution 2021-01, Strengthening 
the State-Federal Relationship.
    States possess the primary legal authority for the allocation, 
management, protection and development of water resources within their 
borders. Congress and the federal judiciary have consistently and 
expressly recognized, and deferred to, this state authority. Federal 
policy must respect and preserve state authority to manage water, as 
well as recognize state law and the financial, environmental and social 
values of water resources to citizens of the western states.
    The following recommendations are intended to ensure that taxpayers 
realize a meaningful return on the investment of limited discretionary 
resources. This goal will be more readily achieved to the extent that 
federal agencies effectively leverage state authority, resources and 
expertise.
    State Authority Over Groundwater: States have exclusive authority 
over groundwater within their borders and are primarily responsible for 
protecting, managing, and otherwise controlling the resource. WGA 
encourages the Subcommittee to prohibit the use of appropriated funds 
for any activity that would, or has the potential to, usurp state 
authority over groundwater resources. Federal agencies must work with 
the states to address any groundwater-related needs and concerns. The 
federal government has long recognized the right to use water as 
determined under the laws of the various states; Western Governors 
value their partnerships with federal agencies as they operate under 
this established legal framework.
    Water Data: Western states need reliable information on the status, 
trends and projections of water availability. Accordingly, Western 
Governors support funding for improved predictive and adaptive 
capabilities for extreme weather variability and related effects, 
including improvements to sub-seasonal and seasonal precipitation and 
water supply forecasting. Forecasting improvements will better support 
water management decision-making and emergency preparedness. Data 
collection, monitoring and communications is most effective when 
coordinated across federal agencies and with state agencies.
    Water Infrastructure: The need for new water projects, as well as 
for improvements to aging water, wastewater and hydropower facilities, 
is becoming increasingly urgent. Infrastructure investments are 
essential to our nation&#x27;s continued economic prosperity, electric 
generation capacity and environmental protection, and they assist 
states in meeting federally mandated environmental standards. The 
Subcommittee should continue to fully use receipts accruing to the 
Reclamation Fund for their intended purpose: the conservation, 
development and use of resources to meet western water-related needs. 
Western Governors support the construction of congressionally 
authorized BOR rural water projects and facilities that are part of 
congressionally authorized Indian water rights settlements.
    The Subcommittee can promote greater investment in water 
infrastructure by using such tools as loan guarantees, revolving funds, 
infrastructure banks, water trust funds, and the Water Infrastructure 
Finance Innovation Act (WIFIA) program. Western Governors urge that 
capital budgeting and asset management principles be used to determine 
funding priorities based on long-term sustainability and not annual 
incremental spending choices. Federal investments in infrastruture need 
to be supported by dedicated sources of funding and guided by 
appropriate financing, cost-sharing, pricing and cost recovery 
policies.
    Aquatic Invasive Species: The spread of invasive quagga and zebra 
mussels continues to be a major threat to western water resources. The 
containment of these invaders at infested waters in the West depends 
upon the collaboration and cooperation of federal, state and local 
agencies. Many state-led containment programs benefit from federal 
cooperation and funding. Western Governors request that the 
Subcommittee provide BOR with the necessary funding to collaborate with 
western states to contain the spread of aquatic invasive species in 
western waters.
    Waste Isolation Pilot Project: Continued funding for DOE&#x27;s Waste 
Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) Transportation Safety Program is essential 
to the expeditious cleanup and disposal of transuranic (TRU) waste from 
U.S. nuclear weapons complex facilities in western states, including 
Idaho National Laboratory, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New 
Mexico, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, and the 
Hanford Site in Washington. DOE must continue to provide sufficient and 
timely in-kind, financial, technical and other appropriate assistance 
to states and tribes through whose jurisdiction TRU waste will be 
transported. This assistance is integral to planning, developing and 
implementing the WIPP Transportation Safety Program. The safe and 
uneventful transportation of TRU waste is a priority of Western 
Governors, and WGA encourages the Subcommittee to provide adequate 
funding to ensure that the important work of the WIPP Transportation 
Safety Program continues.
    Energy: Western Governors support federal programs designed to: 
reduce reliance on oil imports by increasing North American production 
and improving fuel efficiency; develop renewable and alternative fuels; 
and increase innovation and application of energy storage. Congress 
should also: ensure adequate funding and resources for state emergency 
planning, response, and recovery; maintain funding for the State Energy 
Program (SEP), Rural Energy for America Program (REAP), Weatherization 
Assistance Program (WAP), and Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program 
(LIHEAP); and provide appropriations for effective cybersecurity 
infrastructure, education, and workforce development programs. Congress 
should also refrain from advancing the interim storage of commercial 
nuclear waste through the appropriations process without requiring the 
consent of affected Governors. The Subcommittee can also help ensure 
that DOE and other agencies create opportunities for ongoing, 
substantive, and meaningful state consultation in the West-wide energy 
corridor process.
    Western Governors and federal agencies deal with a complex web of 
interrelated energy and water resource issues. It is an enormous 
challenge to judiciously balance competing needs in this environment, 
and Western Governors appreciate the difficulty of the decisions this 
Subcommittee must make. The foregoing recommendations are offered in a 
spirit of cooperation and respect, and WGA is prepared to assist you as 
the Subcommittee discharges its critical and challenging 
responsibilities.

    [This statement was submitted by James D. Ogsbury, Executive 
Director, Western Governors&#x27; Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
          Prepared Statement of the Western Resource Advocates
    Dear Chairman Feinstein and Senator Kennedy:
    We request your support for appropriations in the President&#x27;s 
recommended budget for FY 2022 to the Bureau of Reclamation, Upper 
Colorado Region, to fund the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish 
Recovery Program and the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation 
Program. The programs&#x27; goals are to recovery four species of endangered 
fish and provide ESA compliance for approximately 2,500 water projects 
in the Upper Colorado River Basin.
    These highly successful, cooperative programs are ongoing 
partnerships among the states of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and 
Wyoming, Indian tribes, federal agencies and water, hydropower and 
environmental interests. The conservation group Western Resource 
Advocates (WRA) has been a partner in the program for nearly twenty 
years.
    WRA requests full funding for these programs, including $5.7 
million in the FY22 budget request for capital construction activities 
through the Upper Colorado Region&#x27;s Endangered Species Recovery 
Implementation Program. WRA also appreciates the Subcommittee&#x27;s efforts 
since FY19 to fund environmental programs for the Colorado River at 
$21.4 million, a portion of which supports the Upper Colorado River 
Endangered Fish Recovery Program and San Juan River Basin Recovery 
Implementation Program. WRA requests continued funding for these 
activities, at that level or above, in FY22. This funding for the 
recovery programs is authorized by P.L. 106-392, as amended.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Bart Miller, Healthy Rivers 
Program Director, Western Resource Advocates.]
                                 ______
                                 
         Prepared Statement of the Western States Water Council
    Chair Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and Members of the 
Subcommittee, on behalf of the Western States Water Council (WSWC) we 
welcome the opportunity to provide written testimony on federal agency 
activities and appropriations under the Subcommittee&#x27;s jurisdiction. 
The WSWC is a government entity; an instrumentality of each and every 
participating state advising western governors of water policies and 
programs. Members are appointed and serve at the pleasure of their 
respective governors. The WSWC appreciates the opportunity to provide 
written testimony on activities and appropriations for the U.S. Bureau 
of Reclamation (USBR).
                            reclamation fund
    Recognizing the critical importance of water in the development of 
the West, the Congress passed the Reclamation Act on June 17, 1902 and 
provided monies ``reserved, set aside, and appropriated as a special 
fund in the Treasury to be known as the &#x27;reclamation fund,&#x27; to be used 
in the examination and survey for and the construction and maintenance 
of irrigation works for the storage, diversion, and development of 
water for the reclamation of arid and semiarid land...&#x27;&#x27; in seventeen 
western states, to be continually invested and reinvested.
    The Council requests that the Subcommittee recommend fully 
appropriating the receipts and collections accruing to the Reclamation 
Fund, pursuant to the Reclamation Act and other acts, for their 
intended purpose in the continuing conservation, development and wise 
use of western resources to meet western water-related needs. ``Needs&#x27;&#x27; 
may include Reclamation project dam safety costs, financing 
extraordinary maintenance and rehabilitation of aging infrastructure 
(including transferred works), funding authorized rural water supply 
projects, and the construction of Reclamation facilities incorporated 
as part of a Congressionally approved Indian water right settlements. 
We also support an investigation of converting the Reclamation Fund to 
a true revolving trust fund.
    The Reclamation Fund was envisioned as the principal means to 
finance federal western water and power projects with revenues from 
western resources. Its receipts are derived from water and power sales, 
project repayments, certain receipts from public land sales, leases and 
rentals in the seventeen western states, as well as certain oil and 
mineral related royalties--but these receipts are only available for 
expenditure pursuant to annual appropriation acts. With receipts 
outpacing expenditures for authorized Reclamation purposes, the 
unobligated figure gets larger and larger, while the money is spent 
elsewhere for other federal purposes, contrary to the Congress&#x27; 
original intent. The actual unobligated balance at the start of FY2020 
was $17.668 billion, and was estimated to have been $17.689 billion at 
the beginning of FY2021 and $17.794 billion at the beginning of FY2022.
                      rural water supply projects
    The Council strongly supports funding to expedite construction of 
long-authorized Reclamation rural water supply projects in a timely 
manner, including projects that meet tribal trust and other federal 
responsibilities, while recognizing and continuing to defer to the 
primacy of western water laws and tribal settlements in allocating 
water among users. There are six authorized and active rural water 
projects located in Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota, and South 
Dakota, of which five have yet to be completed at an estimated federal 
cost of around $898 million. Construction costs continue to increase 
due to delays, inflation and the rising costs of materials and labor. 
At current levels of funding, completion of some projects could be 
delayed by decades. There is a Federal responsibility to complete 
authorized rural water projects, particularly those intended to fulfill 
in part a solemn Federal promise and trust responsibility to compensate 
States and Tribes for lost resources as a result of the construction of 
federal flood control projects and other actions.
            project maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation
    The average age of Bureau of Reclamation dams is 70 years, with 
most requiring maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation (MR&amp;R) estimated 
at $2.9 billion. We support federal investments and collaborative 
efforts in water-related infrastructure projects and programs that 
deliver adequate supplies of suitable quality water, and provide jobs 
and economic security, while protecting the environment. We also 
support dedicated federal water infrastructure funding. Reclamation 
operates hundreds of dams, reservoirs, and related infrastructure in 
the West, supplying water and power to millions of people, irrigating 
millions of acres for food and fiber, providing flood control and 
recreation, and supporting wildlife and habitat. The importance of 
these projects cannot be overstated.
    Many of Reclamation&#x27;s facilities are nearing, or have already 
exceeded, their original design lives and are in need of MR&amp;R, in order 
to minimize risk to public safety and continue to serve their 
authorized purposes. MR&amp;R needs refer to both maintenance that has been 
deferred and future projections or anticipated maintenance, repair and 
rehabilitation work. Reclamation&#x27;s existing funding, and the funding 
from non-federal partners, which operates two-thirds of Reclamation&#x27;s 
infrastructure under contract, are not sufficient to address all MR&amp;R 
needs. We support stable and continuous funding streams for 
maintenance, rehabilitation and repair of Reclamation dams and related 
infrastructure, as well as updated evaluations of priority needs
                               dam safety
    The Reclamation Safety of Dams Act of 1978 provides Reclamation 
with authority to preserve and maintain the structural safety of dams 
under its stewardship. The WSWC supports ongoing coordination of state 
and federal efforts to strengthen dam safety programs. We support 
actions that provide stable and continuous federal funding streams for 
Reclamation dam safety work and related infrastructure.
                 forecast informed reservoir operations
    The WSWC supports the use of innovative and forecast informed 
reservoir operations by Reclamation and other public and private 
entities at all levels. This would help to maximize the effective and 
efficient use of our existing and future infrastructure to benefit our 
myriad and growing economic uses of water, while at the same time 
balancing and protecting our need for public health and safety, as well 
as a resilient and healthy environment.
                                 openet
    In the West, the predominant consumptive use of water is 
evapotranspiration (ET) from irrigation. The WSWC supports a $5M 
request under Reclamation&#x27;s WaterSMART program for development of an 
Open Evapotranspiration (OpenET) software system and data platform 
through an operational use partnership (https://openetdata.org/). 
OpenET involves scientists from federal agencies and academic 
institutions using satellite and weather data to map evapotranspiration 
at the individual field scale. With these funds, Reclamation would be 
able to partner with the OpenET consortium and with a broad network of 
collaborators to refine, develop applications, and operationalize the 
use of OpenET, providing credible, transparent, automated, and easily 
accessible consumptive water use data across the West. No such system 
exists today. There is a need for developing new monitoring 
technologies that provide more timely data availability and more 
refined spatial coverage.
    Currently, access to satellite and ET data is limited and 
expensive, keeping it out of the hands of many water users and 
decision-makers. OpenET will allow water managers to assess how much 
water is being used via a cost-effective and easy-to-use web-based 
platform, filling a critical water data management gap.
                                agrimet
    We also support $1million in funding for Reclamation&#x27;s Agrimet 
network of weather stations that provide data that serves as an 
important and efficient ground-truthing, calibration, and model 
validation tool for analysis of information products derived from 
satellite platforms such as OpenET. Agrimet provides basic data on 
precipitation, temperature, solar radiance, wind speed and humidity 
required to calculate reference ET and inform remote-sensing platforms. 
The Agrimet weather observing network suffers from the challenges of 
aging instrumentation infrastructure, deferred maintenance, need for 
technology upgrades, and funding that fails to keep up with these 
needs, making it difficult to maintain data continuity and coverage for 
users.
                                drought
    As the Subcommittee members are aware, much of the West is again in 
the grip of severe to exceptional drought. We support Reclamation&#x27;s 
Drought Response Program, authorized under the Water Sustain and Manage 
America&#x27;s Resources for Tomorrow (WaterSMART) program and the Science 
and Engineering to Comprehensively Understand and Responsibly Enhance 
(SECURE) Water Act, and urge the Subcommittee to provide funding for a 
comprehensive and coordinated national drought preparedness and 
response program on par with federal efforts to address other natural 
disasters.
                               hydropower
    We support reasonable hydropower projects and programs that enhance 
our electric generation capacity and promote economic development 
through streamlined permitting processes, while appropriately 
protecting environmental resources, consistent with States&#x27; law and 
certification authority under the Clean Water Act Section 401.
                       energy and water planning
    Finally, we support integrating water and energy program and 
project planning, including improved data on water and energy supply 
and demand, that promotes conservation and use efficiency while seeking 
to minimize economic, environmental, and other costs.
    Thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony.